blood of amber                                                                    
the second amber pentology - merlin’s story: book 2                               
                                                                     
prologue                                                                          
reflections in a crystal cave—                                                    
my life had been relatively peaceful for eight years—not counting april           
thirtieths, when someone invariably tried to kill me. outside of that, my         
academic career with its concentration on computer science went well              
enough and my four years employment at grand design proved a rewarding            
experience, letting me use what i’d learned in a situation i liked while i        
labored on a project of my own on the side. i had a good friend in luke           
raynard, who worked for the same company, in sales. i sailed my little            
boat, i jogged regularly.                                                         
it all fell apart this past april 30, just when i thought things were about       
to come together. my pet project, ghostwheel, was built, i’d quit my job,         
packed my gear and was ready to move on to greener shadows. i’d stayed in         
town this long only because that morbidly fascinating day was near, and           
this time i intended to discover who was behind the attempts on my life and       
why.                                                                              
at breakfast that morning luke appeared with a message from my                    
former girlfriend, julia. her note said that she wanted to see me again. so i     
stopped by her place, where i found her dead, apparently killed by the same       
doglike beast which then attacked me. i succeeded in destroying the               
creature. a quick search of the apartment before i fled the scene turned up a     
slim packet of strange playing cards, which i took along with me.                 
they were too much like the magical tarots of amber and chaos for a               
sorcerer such as myself not to be interested in them.                             
yes. i am a sorcerer. i am merlin, son of corwin of amber and dara of             
the courts of chaos, known to local friends and acquaintances as merle            
corey: bright, charming, witty, athletic… go read castiglione and lord            
byron for particulars, as i’m modest, aloof and reticent, as well.                
the cards proved to be genuine magical objects, which seemed                      
appropriate once i learned that julia had been keeping company with an            
occultist named victor melman after we had broken up. a visit to this             
gentleman’s studio resulted in his attempting to kill me in a ritual fashion. i   
was able to free myself from the constraints of the ceremony and question         
him somewhat, before local conditions and my enthusiasm resulted in his           
death. so much for rituals.                                                       
i’d learned enough from him to realize that he’d been but a cat’s-paw.            
someone else had apparently put him up to the sacrifice bit—and it seemed         
quite possible that the other person was the one responsible for julia’s death    
and my collection of memorable april thirtieths.                                  
i had small time to reflect upon these matters, though, because i was             
bitten (yes, bitten) shortly thereafter by an attractive red-haired woman who     
materialized in melman’s apartment, following my brief telephone                  
conversation with her in which i’d tried to pose as melman. her bite              
paralyzed me, but i was able to depart before it took full effect by              
employing one of the magical cards i’d found at julia’s place. it bore me         
into the presence of a sphinx, which permitted me to recover so that it could     
play that silly riddle game sphinxes love so well because they get to eat you     
when you lose. all i can say about it is that this particular sphinx was a bad    
sport.                                                                            
anyhow, i returned to the shadow earth where i’d been making my                   
home to discover that melman’s place had burned down during my absence.           
i tried phoning luke, because i wanted to have dinner with him, and               
learned that he had checked out of his motel, leaving me a message                
indicating that he had gone to new mexico on business and telling me              
where he’d be staying. the desk clerk also gave me a blue-stone ring luke         
had left behind, and i took it with me to return when i saw him.                  
i flew to new mexico, finally catching up with luke in santa fe. while            
i waited in the bar for him to get ready for dinner, a man named dan              
martinez questioned me, giving the impression that luke had proposed              
some business deal and that he wanted to be assured luke was reliable and         
could deliver. after dinner, luke and i went for a drive in the mountains.        
martinez followed us and started shooting as we stood admiring the                
night. perhaps he’d decided luke was not reliable or couldn’t deliver. luke       
surprised me by drawing a weapon of his own and shooting martinez. then           
an even stranger thing happened. luke called me by name—my real name,             
which i’d never told him—and cited my parentage and told me to get into           
the car and get the hell out. he emphasized his point by placing a shot in the    
ground near my feet. the matter did not seem open to discussion so i              
departed. he also told me to destroy those strange trumps that had saved          
my life once already. and i’d learned on the way up that he’d known victor        
melman…                                                                           
i didn’t go far. i parked downhill and returned on foot. luke was gone.           
so was martinez’s body. luke did not return to the hotel, that night or the       
next day, so i checked out and departed. the only person i was sure i could       
trust, and who actually might have some good advice for me, was bill roth.        
bill was an attorney who lived in upstate new york, and he had been my            
father’s best friend. i went to visit him, and i told him my story.               
bill got me to wondering even more about luke. luke, by the way, is a             
big, smart, red-haired natural athlete of uncanny prowess—and though we’d         
been friends for many years i knew next to nothing (as bill pointed out)          
concerning his background.                                                        
a neighboring lad named george hansen began hanging out near bill’s               
place, asking strange questions. i received an odd phone call, asking similar     
questions. both interrogators seemed curious as to my mother’s name.              
naturally, i lied. the fact that my mother is a member of the dark                
aristocracy of the courts of chaos was none of their business. but the caller     
spoke my language, thari, which made me curious enough to propose a               
meeting and a trade-off of information that evening in the bar of the local       
country club.                                                                     
but my uncle random, king of amber, called me home before that,                   
while bill and i were out hiking. george hansen, it turned out, was               
following us and wanted to come along as we shifted away across the               
shadows of reality. tough; he wasn’t invited. i took bill along because i         
didn’t want to leave him with anyone acting that peculiar.                        
i learned from random that my uncle caine was dead, of an assassin’s              
bullet, and that someone had also tried to kill my uncle bleys but only           
succeeded in wounding him. the funeral service for caine would be the             
following day.                                                                    
i kept my date at the country club that evening, but my mysterious                
interrogator was nowhere in sight. all was not lost, however, as i made the       
acquaintance of a pretty lady named meg devlin—and, one thing leading to          
another, i saw her home and we got to know each other a lot better. then, at      
a moment when i would have judged her thoughts to be anywhere but there,          
she asked me my mother’s name. so, what the hell, i told her. it did not          
come to me until later that she might really have been the person i’d gone to     
the bar to meet.                                                                  
our liaison was terminated prematurely by a call from the lobby—from              
a man purportedly meg’s husband. i did what any gentleman would do. i             
got the hell out fast.                                                            
my aunt fiona, who is a sorceress (of a different style from my own),             
had not approved of my date. and apparently she approved even less of             
luke, because she asked me whether i had a picture of him after i’d told her      
somewhat concerning him. i showed her a photo i had in my wallet, which           
included luke in the group. i’d have sworn she recognized him from                
somewhere, though she wouldn’t admit it. but the fact that she and her            
brother bleys both disappeared from amber that night would seem more              
than coincidental.                                                                
the pace of events was accelerated even more after that. a crude                  
attempt at knocking off most of the family with a thrown bomb was made            
the next day, following caine’s funeral. the would-be assassin escaped.           
later, random was upset at a brief demonstration on my part of the power          
of the ghostwheel, my pet project, my hobby, my avocation during those            
years at grand design. ghostwheel is a—well, it started out as a computer         
that required a different set of physical laws to operate than those i’d          
learned in school. it involved what might be called magic. but i found a          
place where it could be built and operated, and i’d constructed it there. it      
was still programming itself when i’d left it. it seemed to have gone             
sentient, and i think it scared random. he ordered me to go and turn it off. i    
didn’t much like the idea, but i departed.                                        
i was followed in my passage through shadow; i was harassed,                      
threatened and even attacked. i was rescued from a fire by a strange lady         
who later died in a lake. i was protected from vicious beasts by a                
mysterious individual and saved from a bizarre earthquake by the same             
person—who turned out to be luke. he accompanied me to the final                  
barrier, for a confrontation with ghostwheel. my creation was a bit irritated     
with me and banished us by means of a shadow-storm—a thing it is not fun          
to be caught in, with or without an umbrella. i delivered us from the             
vicissitudes by means of one of the trumps of doom, as i’d dubbed the odd         
pasteboards from julia’s apartment.                                               
we wound up outside a blue crystal cave, and luke took me in. good                
old luke. after seeing to my needs he proceeded to imprison me. when he           
told me who he was, i realized that it was a resemblance to his father which      
had upset fiona when she’d seen his photo. for luke was the son of brand,         
assassin and arch traitor, who had damn near destroyed the kingdom and the        
rest of the universe along with it some years back. fortunately, caine had        
killed him before he’d accomplished his designs. luke, i learned then, was        
the one who’d killed caine, to avenge his father. (and it turned out he’d         
gotten the news of his father’s death on an april thirtieth and had had a         
peculiar way of observing its anniversary over the years.) like random, he        
too had been impressed by my ghostwheel, and he told me that i was to             
remain his prisoner, as i might become necessary in his efforts to gain           
control of the machine, which he felt would be the perfect weapon for             
destroying the rest of the family.                                                
he departed to pursue the matter, and i quickly discovered that my                
powers were canceled by some peculiar property of the cave, leaving me            
with no one to talk to but you, frakir, and no one here for you to strangle…      
would you care to hear a few bars of “over the rainbow”?                          
                                                                     
chapter 1                                                                         
i threw the hilt away after the blade had shattered. the weapon had done          
me no good against that blue sea of a wall in what i had taken to be its          
thinnest section. a few small chips of stone lay at my feet. i picked them up     
and rubbed them together. this was not the way out for me. the only way           
out seemed to be the way i had come in, and it wasn’t working.                    
i walked back to my quarters, meaning that section of the caves where i           
had cast my sleeping bag. i sat down on the bag, a heavy brown one,               
uncorked a wine bottle and took a drink. i had worked up a sweat hacking          
away at the wall.                                                                 
frakir stirred upon my wrist then, unwound herself partway and                    
slithered into the palm of my left hand, to coil around the two blue chips i      
still held. she knotted herself about them, then dropped to hang and swing        
pendulum-like. i put the bottle aside and watched. the arc of her swing           
paralleled the lengthwise direction of the tunnel i now called home. the          
swinging continued for perhaps a full minute. then she withdrew upward,           
halting when she came to the back of my hand. she released the chips at the       
base of my third finger and returned to her normal hidden position about my       
wrist.                                                                            
i stared. i raised the flickering oil lamp and studied the stones. their          
color…                                                                            
yes.                                                                              
seen against skin, they were similar in appearance to the stone in that           
ring of luke’s i had picked up at the new line motel some time ago.               
coincidence? or was there a connection? what had my strangling cord               
been trying to tell me? and where had i seen another such stone?                  
luke’s key ring. he’d a blue stone on it, mounted on a piece of metal…            
and where might i have seen another?                                              
the caverns in which i was imprisoned had the power to block the                  
trumps and my logrus magic. if luke carried stones from these walls               
about with him, there was probably a special reason. what other properties        
might they possess?                                                               
i tried for perhaps an hour to learn something concerning their nature,           
but they resisted my logrus probes. finally, disgusted, i pocketed them, ate      
some bread and cheese and took another swallow of wine.                           
then i rose and made the rounds once more, inspecting my traps. i’d               
been a prisoner in this place for what seemed at least a month now. i had         
paced all these tunnels, corridors, grottoes, seeking an exit. none of them       
proved a way out. there were times when i had run manic through them              
and bloodied my knuckles upon their cold sides. there were times when i           
had moved slowly, seeking after cracks and fault lines. i had tried on            
several occasions to dislodge the boulder that barred the entranceway—to          
no avail. it was wedged in place, and i couldn’t budge it. it seemed that i       
was in for the duration.                                                          
my traps…                                                                         
they were all as they had been the last time i had checked—deadfalls,             
boulders nature had left lying about in typical careless fashion, propped         
high and ready now to be released from their wedging when someone                 
tripped any of the shadow-masked lengths of packing cord i’d removed              
from crates in the storeroom.                                                     
someone? luke, of course. who else? he was the one who’d                          
imprisoned me. and if he returned—no, when he returned—the booby traps            
would be waiting. he was armed. he would have me at a disadvantage from           
the overhead position of the entrance if i merely waited for him below. no        
way. i would not be there. i would make him come in after me—and then…            
vaguely troubled, i returned to my quarters.                                      
hands behind my head, i lay there and reviewed my plans. the                      
deadfalls could kill a man, and i did not want luke dead. this had nothing        
to do with sentiment, though i had thought of luke as a good friend until         
fairly recently—up until the time i learned that he had killed my uncle           
caine and seemed intent upon destroying the rest of my relatives in amber         
as well. this was because caine had killed luke’s father—my uncle brand           
—a man whom any of the others would gladly have done in also. yes, luke           
—or rinaldo, as i now knew him—was my cousin, and he had a reason for             
engaging in one of our in-family vendettas. still, going after everybody          
struck me as a bit intemperate.                                                   
but neither consanguinity nor sentiment bade me dismantle my traps. i             
wanted him alive because there were too many things about the entire              
situation that i did not understand and might never understand were he to         
perish without telling me.                                                        
jasra… the trumps of doom… the means by which i had been tracked                  
so easily through shadow… the entire story of luke’s relationship with the        
painter and mad occultist victor melman… anything he knew about julia             
and her death…                                                                    
i began again. i dismantled the deadfalls. the new plan was a simple              
one, and it drew upon something of which i believed luke had no                   
knowledge.                                                                        
i moved my sleeping bag to a new position in the tunnel just outside the          
chamber whose roof held the blocked entranceway. i shifted some of the            
food stores there, also. i was determined to remain in its vicinity for as        
much of the time as possible.                                                     
the new trap was a very basic thing: direct and just about unavoidable.           
once i’d set it there was nothing to do but wait. wait, and remember. and         
plan. i had to warn the others. i had to do something about my ghostwheel.        
i needed to find out what meg devlin knew. i needed to… lots of things.           
i waited. i thought of shadow storms, dreams, strange trumps and the              
lady in the lake. after a long spell of drifting, my life had become very         
crowded in a matter of days. then this long spell of doing nothing. my only       
consolation was that this time line probably outpaced most of the others that     
were important to me right now. my month here might only be a day back            
in amber, or even less. if i could deliver myself from this place soon, the       
trails i wished to follow might still be relatively fresh.                        
later, i put out the lamp and went to sleep. sufficient light filtered            
through the crystal lenses of my prison, brightening and waning, for me to        
distinguish day from night in the outside world, and i kept my small series       
of routines in accord with its rhythms.                                           
during the next three days i read through melman’s diary again—a                  
thing heavy in allusion and low in useful information—and just about              
succeeded in convincing myself that the hooded one, as he referred to his         
visitor and teacher, had probably been luke. except for a few references to       
androgyny, which puzzled me. references to the sacrifice of the son of            
chaos near the end of the volume were something i could take personally,          
in light of my present knowledge of melman’s having been set up to destroy        
me. but if luke had done it, how to explain his ambiguous behavior on the         
mountain in new mexico, when he had advised me to destroy the trumps              
of doom and had driven me away almost as if to protect me from                    
something? and then he had admitted to several of the earlier attempts on         
my life, but denied the later ones. no reason to do that if he were indeed        
responsible for all of them. what else might be involved? who else? and           
how? there were obviously missing pieces to the puzzle, but i felt as if they     
were minor, as if the smallest bit of new information and the slightest           
jiggling of the pattern would suddenly cause everything to fall into place,       
with the emerging picture to be something i should have seen all along.           
i might have guessed that the visitation would be by night. i might have,         
but i didn’t. had it occurred to me, i would have changed my sleep cycle          
and been awake and alert. even though i felt fairly confident of my trap’s        
efficiency, every little edge is important in truly crucial matters.              
i was deeply asleep, and the grating of rock upon rock was a distant              
thing. i stirred but slowly as the sounds continued, and it was several           
seconds more before the proper circuits closed and i realized what was            
occurring. then i sat up, my mind still dusty, and moved into a crouch            
beside the wall of the chamber nearest the entranceway, knuckling my eyes,        
brushing back my hair, seeking lost alertness on sleep’s receding shore.          
the first sounds i heard must have accompanied the removal of the                 
wedges, which apparently had entailed some rocking or tipping of the              
boulder. the continuing sounds were muffled, echoless—external.                   
so i ventured a quick glance into the chamber. there was no opened                
adit showing stars. the overhead vibrations continued. the rocking sounds         
were now succeeded by a steady crunching, grating noise. a ball of light          
with a diffuse halo shone through the translucent stone of the chamber’s          
roof. a lantern, i guessed. too steady to be a torch. and a torch would be        
impractical under the circumstances.                                              
a crescent of sky appeared, holding two stars near its nether horn. it            
widened, and i heard the heavy breathing and grunts of what i took to be          
two men.                                                                          
my extremities tingled as i felt additional adrenaline doing its biological       
trick within me. i hadn’t counted on luke’s bringing anyone with him. my          
foolproof plan might not be proof against this—meaning i was the fool.            
the boulder rolled more quickly now, and there was not even time for              
profanity as my mind raced, focused upon a course of action and assumed           
its appropriate stance.                                                           
i summoned the image of the logrus and it took shape before me. i rose            
to my feet, still leaning against the wall, and began moving my arms to           
correspond with the random-seeming movements of two of the eidolon’s              
limbs. by the time i achieved a satisfactory conjunction, the sounds from         
overhead had ceased.                                                              
the opening was now clear. moments later the light was raised and                 
moved toward it.                                                                  
i stepped into the chamber and extended my hands. as the men, short               
and dark, came into view above me my original plan was canceled                   
completely. they both carried unsheathed poignards in their right hands.          
neither of them was luke.                                                         
i reached out with my logrus gauntlets and took hold of each of them              
by the throat. i squeezed until they collapsed within my grip. i squeezed a       
little longer, then released them.                                                
as they dropped from sight i hooked the high lip of the entrance with             
my glowing lines of force and drew myself upward with them. as i reached          
the opening i paused to recover frakir, who was coiled about its underside.       
that had been my trap. luke, or anyone else, would have been passing              
through a noose to enter, a noose ready to tighten instantly upon anything        
moving through.                                                                   
now, though…                                                                      
a trail of fire ran down the slope to my right. the fallen lantern had            
shattered, its spilled fuel become a burning rivulet. the men i had choked        
lay sprawled at either hand. the boulder that had blocked this opening            
rested to the left and somewhat to the rear of me. i remained where i was—        
head and shoulders above the opening, resting on my elbows—with the               
image of the logrus dancing between my eyes, the warm tingling of its             
power lines yet a part of my arms, frakir moving from my left shoulder            
down to my biceps.                                                                
it had been almost too easy. i couldn’t see luke trusting a couple of             
lackeys to question, kill or transport me—whichever of these had been their       
mission. that is why i had not emerged fully, but scanned the nighted             
environs from my vantage of relative security.                                    
prudent, for a change. for someone else shared the night with me. it              
was sufficiently dark, even with the dwindling fire trail, that my ordinary       
vision did not serve to furnish me this intelligence. but when i summon the       
logrus, the mental set that grants me vision of its image permits me to view      
other nonphysical manifestations as well.                                         
so it was that i detected such a construct beneath a tree to my left, amid        
shadows where i would not have seen the human figure before which it              
hovered. and a strange pattern at that, reminiscent of amber’s own; it            
turned like a slow pinwheel, extending tendrils of smoke-shot yellow light.       
these drifted toward me across the night and i watched, fascinated,               
knowing already what i would do when the moment came.                             
there were four big ones, and they came on slowly, probing. when they             
were within several yards of me they halted, gained slack, then struck like       
cobras. my hands were together and slightly crossed, logrus limbs                 
extended. i separated them with a single sweeping motion, tilting them            
slightly forward as i did so. they struck the yellow tendrils, casting them       
away to be thrown back upon their pattern. i felt a tingling sensation in my      
forearms as this occurred. then, using my right-hand extension as if it were      
a blade, i struck at the now-wavering pattern as if it were a shield. i heard a   
short sharp cry as that image grew dim, and i struck again quickly, hauled        
myself out of my hole and started down the slope, my arm aching.                  
the image—whatever it had been—faded and was gone. by then,                       
however, i could make out more clearly the figure leaning against the tree        
trunk. it appeared to be that of a woman, though i could not distinguish her      
features because of some small object she had raised and now held before          
her near to eye level. fearing that it was a weapon, i struck at it with a        
logrus extension, hoping to knock it from her hand.                               
i stumbled then, for there was a recoil which jolted my arm with                  
considerable force. it would seem to have been a potent sorcerous object          
which i had struck. at least i had the pleasure of seeing the lady sway also.     
she uttered a short cry, too, but she hung on to the object.                      
a moment later a faint polychrome shimmering began about her form                 
and i realized what the thing was. i had just directed the force of the logrus    
against a trump. i had to reach her now, if only to find out who she was.         
but as i rushed ahead i realized that i could not get to her in time.             
unless…                                                                           
i plucked frakir from my shoulder and past her along the line of the              
logrus force, manipulating her in the proper direction and issuing my             
commands as she flew.                                                             
from my new angle of view and by the faint rainbow halo that now                  
surrounded her i finally saw the lady’s face. it was jasra, who had damn          
near killed me with a bite back in melman’s apartment. in a moment she            
would be gone, taking with her my chance of obtaining some answers on             
which my life might depend.                                                       
“jasra!” i cried, trying to break her concentration.                              
it didn’t work, but frakir did. my strangling cord, glowing silver now,           
caught her about the throat, whipping out with a free end to lash tightly         
about the branch that hung near, to jasra’s left.                                 
the lady began to fade, apparently not realizing that it was too late. she        
couldn’t trump out without decapitating herself.                                  
she learned it quickly. i heard her gurgling cry as she stepped back,             
grew solid, lost her halo, dropped her trump and clawed at the cord               
encircling her throat.                                                            
i came up beside her, to lay my hand upon frakir, who uncoiled one end            
from the tree limb and rewound it about my wrist.                                 
“good evening, jasra,” i said, jerking her head back. “try the poison             
bite again and you’ll need a neck brace. you understand?”                         
she tried to talk but couldn’t. she nodded.                                       
“i’m going to loosen my cord a bit,” i said, “so you can answer my                
questions.”                                                                       
i eased frakir’s grip upon her throat. she began coughing, then, and              
gave me a look that would have turned sand to glass. her magical construct        
had faded completely, so i let the logrus slip away also.                         
“why are you after me?” i asked. “what am i to you?”                              
“son of perdition!” she said, and she tried to spit at me but her mouth           
must have been too dry.                                                           
i jerked lightly on frakir and she coughed again. “wrong answer,” i               
said. “try again.”                                                                
but she smiled then, her gaze shifting to a point beyond me. i kept the           
slack out of frakir and chanced a glance. the air was beginning to shimmer,       
behind me and to the right, in obvious preparation to someone’s trumping          
in.                                                                               
i did not feel ready to take on an additional threat at this time, and so i       
dipped my free hand into my pocket and withdrew a handful of my own               
trumps. flora’s was on top. fine. she’d do.                                       
i pushed my mind toward her, through the feeble light, beyond the face            
of the card. i felt her distracted attention, followed by a sudden alertness.     
then, yes…?                                                                       
“bring me through! hurry!” i said.                                                
“is it an emergency?” she asked.                                                  
“you’d better believe it,” i told her.                                            
“uh—okay. come on.”                                                               
i had an image of her in bed. it grew clearer, clearer. she extended her          
hand.                                                                             
i reached out and took it. i moved forward just as i heard luke’s voice           
ring out, crying, “stop!”                                                         
i continued on through, dragging jasra after me. she tried to draw back           
and succeeded in halting me as i stumbled against the side of the bed. it was     
then i noted the dark-haired, bearded man regarding me with wide eyes             
from the bed’s farther side.                                                      
“who—? what—?” he began as i smiled bleakly and regained my                       
balance.                                                                          
luke’s shadowy form came into view beyond my prisoner. he reached                 
forward and seized jasra’s arm, drawing her back away from me. she made           
a gurgling noise as the movement drew frakir more tightly about her throat.       
damn! what now?                                                                   
flora rose suddenly, her face contorted, the scented lavender sheet               
falling away as she drove a fist forward with surprising speed.                   
“you bitch!” she cried. “remember me?”                                            
the blow fell upon jasra’s jaw, and i barely managed to free frakir in            
time to keep from being dragged backward with her into luke’s waiting             
arms.                                                                             
both of them faded, and the shimmer was gone.                                     
the dark-haired guy in the meantime had scrambled out of the bed and              
was snatching up articles of clothing. once he had them all in his grasp he       
did not bother to don any, but simply held them in front of him and backed        
quickly toward the door.                                                          
“ron! where are you going?” flora asked.                                          
“away!” he answered, and he opened the door and passed through it.                
“hey! wait!”                                                                      
“no way!” came the reply from the next room.                                      
“damn!” she said, glaring at me. “you have a way of messing up a                  
person’s life.” then, “ron! what about dinner?” she called.                       
“i have to see my analyst,” came his voice, followed shortly by the               
slamming of another door.                                                         
“i hope you realize what a beautiful thing you just destroyed,” flora             
told me.                                                                          
i sighed. “when did you meet him?” i asked.                                       
she frowned. “well, yesterday,” she replied. “go ahead and smirk.                 
these things are not always a mere function of time. i could tell right away      
that it was going to be something special. trust someone crass like you or        
your father to cheapen a beautiful—”                                              
“i’m sorry,” i said. “thanks for pulling me through. of course he’ll be           
back. we just scared the hell out of him. but how could he fail to return         
once he’s known you?”                                                             
she smiled. “yes, you are like corwin,” she said. “crass, but                     
perceptive.”                                                                      
she rose and crossed to the closet, took out a lavender robe and donned           
it.                                                                               
“what,” she said, belting it about her, “was that all about?”                     
“it’s a long story—”                                                              
“then i’d better hear it over lunch. are you hungry?” she asked.                  
i grinned.                                                                        
“it figures. come on.”                                                            
she led me out through a french provincial living room and into a large           
country kitchen full of tiles and copper. i offered to help her, but she          
pointed at a chair beside the table and told me to sit.                           
as she was removing numerous goodies from the refrigerator, i said,               
“first—”                                                                          
“yes?”                                                                            
“where are we?”                                                                   
“san francisco,” she replied.                                                     
“why have you set up housekeeping here?”                                          
“after i finished that business of random’s i decided to stay on. the             
town looked good to me again.”                                                    
i snapped my fingers. i’d forgotten she’d been sent to determine the              
ownership of the warehouse where victor melman had had his apartment              
and studio, and where brutus storage had a supply of ammo that would fire         
in amber.                                                                         
“so who owned the warehouse?” i asked.                                            
“brutus storage,” she replied. “melman rented from them.”                         
“and who owns brutes storage?”                                                    
“j. b. rand, inc.”                                                                
“address?”                                                                        
“an office in sausalito. it was vacated a couple of months ago.”                  
“did the people who owned the place have a home address for the                   
renter?”                                                                          
“just a post office box. it’s been abandoned too.”                                
i nodded. “i’d a feeling it would be something like that,” i said. “now           
tell me about jasra. obviously you know the lady.”                                
she sniffed. “no lady,” she said. “a royal whore is what she was when i           
knew her.”                                                                        
“where?”                                                                          
“in kashfa.”                                                                      
“where’s that?”                                                                   
“an interesting little shadow kingdom, a bit over the edge of the golden          
circle of those with which amber has commerce. shabby barbaric splendor           
and all that. it’s kind of a cultural backwater.”                                 
“how is it you know it at all, then?”                                             
she paused a moment in stirring something in a bowl.                              
“oh, i used to keep company with a kashfan nobleman i’d met in a                  
wood one day. he was out hawking and i happened to have twisted my                
ankle—”                                                                           
“uh,” i interjected, lest we be diverted by details. “and jasra?”                 
“she was consort to the old king menillan. had him wrapped around                 
her finger.”                                                                      
“what have you got against her?”                                                  
“she stole jasrick while i was out of town.”                                      
“jasrick?”                                                                        
“my nobleman. earl of kronklef.”                                                  
“what did his highness menillan think of these goings-on?”                        
“he never knew. he was on his deathbed at the time. succumbed                     
shortly thereafter. in fact, that’s why she really wanted jasrick. he was chief   
of the palace guard and his brother was a general. she used them to pull off      
a coup when menillan expired. last i heard, she was queen in kashfa and           
she’d ditched jasrick. served him proper, i’d say. i think he had his eye on      
the throne, but she didn’t care to share it. she had him and his brother          
executed for treason of one sort or another. he was really a handsome             
fellow… not too bright, though.”                                                  
“do the people of kashfa have any—uh—unusual physical                             
endowments?” i asked.                                                             
she smiled. “well, jasrick was one hell of a fellow. but i wouldn’t use           
the word ‘unusual’ to—”                                                           
“no, no,” i interrupted. “what i meant was some sort of anomaly of the            
mouth—retractable fangs or a sting or something of that sort.”                    
“un-uh,” she said, and i could not tell whether her heightened coloring           
came from the heat of the stove. “nothing like that. they’re built along          
standard lines. why do you ask?”                                                  
“when i told you my story back in amber i omitted the part where                  
jasra bit me, and i was barely able to trump out because of some sort of          
poison she seemed to have injected. it left me numb, paralyzed and very           
weak for a long while.”                                                           
she shook her head.                                                               
“kashfans can’t do anything like that. but then, of course, jasra is not a        
kashfan.”                                                                         
“oh? where’s she from?”                                                           
“i don’t know. but she’s a foreigner. some say a slaver brought her in            
from a distant land. others say she just wandered in herself one day and          
caught menillan’s eye. it was rumored she was a sorceress. i don’t know.”         
“i do. that rumor is right.”                                                      
“really? perhaps that’s how she got jasrick.”                                     
i shrugged. “how long ago was your—experience—with her?”                          
“thirty or forty years, i’d guess.”                                               
“and she is still queen in kashfa?”                                               
“i don’t know. it’s been a long time since i’ve been back that way.”              
“is amber on bad terms with kashfa?”                                              
she shook her head. “no special terms at all, really. as i said, they’re a        
bit out of the way. not as accessible as a lot of other places, with nothing      
greatly desirable for trade.”                                                     
“no real reason then for her to hate us?”                                         
“no more than for hating anyone else.”                                            
some delightful cooking odors began to fill the room. as i sat there              
sniffing them and thinking of the long, hot shower i would head for after         
lunch, flora said what i had somehow known she would say.                         
“that man who dragged jasra back… he looked familiar. who was                     
he?”                                                                              
“he was the one i told you about back in amber,” i replied. “luke. i’m            
curious whether he reminds you of anyone.”                                        
“he seems to,” she said, after a pause. “but i can’t say just who.”               
as her back was to me i said, “if you’re holding anything that might              
break or spill if you drop it, please put it down.”                               
i heard something set to rest on the countertop. then she turned, a               
puzzled expression on her face.                                                   
“yes?”                                                                            
“his real name is rinaldo, and he’s brand’s son,” i told her. “i was his          
prisoner for over a month in another shadow. i just now escaped.”                 
“oh, my,” she whispered. then, “what does he want?”                               
“revenge,” i answered.                                                            
“against anyone in particular?”                                                   
“no. all of us. but caine, of course, was first.”                                 
“i see.”                                                                          
“please don’t burn anything,” i said. “i’ve been looking forward to a             
good meal for a long time.”                                                       
she nodded and turned away. after a while she said, “you knew him for             
a pretty long time. what’s he like?”                                              
“he always seemed to be a fairly nice guy. if he’s crazy, like his dad, he        
hid it well.”                                                                     
she uncorked a wine bottle, poured two glasses and brought them over.             
then she began serving the meal.                                                  
after a few bites she paused with her fork half raised and stared at              
nothing in particular.                                                            
“who’d have thought the son of a bitch would reproduce?” she                      
remarked.                                                                         
“fiona, i think,” i told her. “the night before caine’s funeral she asked         
me whether i had a photo of luke. when i showed her one i could tell that         
something was bothering her, but she wouldn’t say what.”                          
“and the next day she and bleys were gone,” flora said. “yes. now i               
think of it, he does look somewhat the way brand did when he was very             
young—so long ago. luke seems bigger and heavier, but there is a                  
resemblance.”                                                                     
she resumed eating.                                                               
“by the way, this is very good,” i said.                                          
“oh, thanks.” she sighed then. “that means i have to wait till you’re             
finished eating to hear the whole story.”                                         
i nodded, because my mouth was full. let the empire totter. i was                 
starved.                                                                          
                                                                     
chapter 2                                                                         
showered, trimmed, manicured and garbed in fresh-conjured finery, i got a         
number out of information and placed a call to the only devlin listed in bill     
roth’s area. the voice of the woman who answered did not possess the              
proper timbre, though i still recognized it.                                      
“meg? meg devlin?” i said.                                                        
“yes,” came the reply. “who is this?”                                             
“merle corey.”                                                                    
“who?”                                                                            
“merle corey. we spent an interesting night together some time back               
—”                                                                                
“i’m sorry,” she said. “there must be some mistake.”                              
“if you can’t talk freely now i can call whenever you say. or you can             
call me.”                                                                         
“i don’t know you,” she said, and she hung up.                                    
i stared at the receiver. if her husband were present i’d assumed she’d           
play it a bit cagey but would at least give some indication that she knew me      
and would talk another time. i had held off on getting in touch with              
random because i’d a feeling he’d summon me back to amber                         
immediately, and i’d wanted to talk to meg first. i certainly couldn’t spare      
the time to go and visit her. i could not understand her response, but for        
now at least i was stuck with it. so i tried the only other thing that occurred   
to me. i got hold of information again and obtained the number for bill’s         
next-door neighbors, the hansens.                                                 
it was answered on the third ring—a woman’s voice i recognized as                 
mrs. hansen’s. i had met her in the past, though i had not seen her on my         
most recent trip to the area.                                                     
“mrs. hansen,” i began. “it’s merle corey.”                                       
“oh, merle… you were just up here a while ago, weren’t you?”                      
“yes. couldn’t stay long, though. but i did finally get to meet george.           
had several long talks with him. in fact, i’d like to speak with him right        
now if he’s handy.”                                                               
the silence ran several beats too long before she responded.                      
“george… well, george is over at the hospital just now, merle. is it              
something you could tell me?”                                                     
“oh, it’s not urgent,” i said. “what happened to george?”                         
“it—it’s nothing real bad. he’s just an outpatient now, and today’s his           
day to get checked over and pick up some medication. he had a—sort of             
breakdown last month. had a couple days’ worth of amnesia, and they can’t         
seem to figure what caused it.”                                                   
“i’m sorry to hear that.”                                                         
“well, the x-rays didn’t show any damage—like he’d hit his head or                
anything. and he seems okay now. they say he’ll probably be fine. but             
they want to keep an eye on him a little longer. that’s all.” suddenly, as if     
struck by inspiration, she asked, “how’d he seem when you were talking            
with him, anyway?”                                                                
i’d seen it coming, so i didn’t hesitate.                                         
“he seemed fine when i talked with him,” i answered. “but of course i             
hadn’t known him before, so i couldn’t tell whether he was acting any             
different.”                                                                       
“i see what you mean,” she said. “do you want him to call you back                
when he gets in?”                                                                 
“no. i’m going to be going out,” i said, “and i’m not sure when i’ll be           
getting back. it was nothing really important. i’ll get in touch again one of     
these days.”                                                                      
“okay, then. i’ll tell him you called.”                                           
“thanks. g’bye.”                                                                  
that one i’d almost expected. after meg. george’s behavior had been               
overtly weird, at the end there. what had bothered me was that he’d seemed        
to know who i really was and to know about amber—and he even wanted               
to follow me through a trump. it was as if he and meg had both been               
subjected to some strange manipulation.                                           
jasra came to mind immediately in this regard. but then she was luke’s            
ally, it seemed, and meg had warned me against luke. why would she do             
that if jasra were controlling her in some fashion? it didn’t make sense.         
who else did i know who might be capable of causing such phenomena?               
fiona, for one. but then she’d been party to my later return to this              
shadow from amber and had even picked me up after my evening with                 
meg. and she’d seemed just as puzzled about the course of events as i was.        
shit. life is full of doors that don’t open when you knock, equally               
spaced amid those that open when you don’t want them to.                          
i went back and knocked on the bedroom door, and flora told me to                 
come in. she was seated before a mirror, applying makeup.                         
“how’d it go?” she asked.                                                         
“not too well. totally unsatisfactory, actually.” i summarized the results        
of my calls.                                                                      
“so what are you going to do now?” she inquired.                                  
“get in touch with random,” i said, “and bring him up to date. i’ve got           
a feeling he’ll call me back to hear it all. so i wanted to say good-bye, and     
thanks for helping me. sorry if i broke up your romance.”                         
she shrugged, her back still to me, as she studied herself in the mirror.         
“don’t worry—”                                                                    
i did not hear the remainder of her sentence, though she continued                
talking. my attention was snatched away by what seemed the beginning of a         
trump contact. i made myself receptive and waited. the feeling grew               
stronger but the caller s presence did not become manifest. i turned away         
from flora.                                                                       
“merle, what is it?” i heard her say then.                                        
i raised one hand to her as the feeling intensified. i seemed to be staring       
down a long black tunnel with nothing at its farther end.                         
“i don’t know,” i said, summoning the logrus and taking control of one            
of its limbs. “ghost? is that you? are you ready to talk?” i asked. there         
was no reply. i felt a chill as i remained receptive, waiting. i had never        
experienced anything quite like this before. i’d a strong feeling that if i but   
moved forward i would be transported somewhere. was this a challenge? a           
trap? whatever, i felt that only a fool would accept such an invitation from      
the unknown. for all i knew, it might deliver me back to the crystal cave.        
“if there is something you want,” i said, “you are going to have to make          
yourself known and ask. i’ve given up on blind dates.”                            
a sense of presence trickled through, then, but no intimations of                 
identity.                                                                         
“all right,” i said. “i’m not coming and you have no message. the only            
other thing i can think of is that you’re asking to come to me. if that’s the     
case, come ahead.”                                                                
i extended both of my apparently empty hands, my invisible strangling             
cord writhing into position in my left, an unseen logrus death bolt riding        
my right. it was one of those times when courtesy demanded professional           
standards.                                                                        
a soft laughter seemed to echo within the dark tunnel. it was purely a            
mental projection, however, cold and genderless.                                  
your offer is, of course, a trick, come to me then. for you are not a fool.       
still, i grant your courage, to address the unknown as you do. you do not         
know what you face, yet you await it. you even invite it.                         
“the offer is still good,” i said.                                                
i never thought of you as dangerous.                                              
“what do you want?”                                                               
to regard you.                                                                    
“why?”                                                                            
there may come a time when i will face you on different terms.                    
“what terms?”                                                                     
i feel that our purposes will be crossed.                                         
“who are you?”                                                                    
again, the laughter.                                                              
no. not now. not yet. i would merely look upon you, and observe your              
reactions.                                                                        
“well? have you seen enough?”                                                     
almost.                                                                           
“if our purposes are crossed, let the conflict be now,” i said. “i’d like to      
get it out of the way so i can get on with some important business.”              
i appreciate arrogance. but when the time comes the choice will not be            
yours.                                                                            
“i’m willing to wait,” i said, as i cautiously extended a logrus limb out         
along the dark way.                                                               
nothing. my probe encountered nothing…                                            
i admire your performance. here!                                                  
something came rushing toward me. my magical extension informed                   
me that it was soft—too soft and loose to do me any real harm—a large,            
cool mass showing bright colors…                                                  
i stood my ground and extended through it—beyond, far, farther—                   
reaching for the source. i encountered something tangible but yielding: a         
body perhaps, perhaps not; too—too big to snap back in an instant.                
several small items, hard and of sufficiently low mass, recommended               
themselves to my lightning search. i seized upon one, tore it free of             
whatever held it and called it to me.                                             
a wordless impulse of startlement reached me at the same time as the              
rushing mass and the return of my logrus summoning.                               
it burst about me like fireworks: flowers, flowers, flowers. violets,             
anemones, daffodils, roses… i heard flora gasp as hundreds of them rained         
into the room. the contact was broken immediately. i was aware that i held        
something small and hard in my right hand, and the heady odors of the             
floral display filled my nostrils.                                                
“what the hell,” said flora, “happened?”                                          
“i’m not sure,” i answered, brushing petals from my shirtfront. “you              
like flowers? you can have these.”                                                
“thanks, but i prefer a less haphazard arrangement,” she said, regarding          
the bright mound that lay at my feet. “who sent them?”                            
“a nameless person at the end of a dark tunnel.”                                  
“why?”                                                                            
“down payment on a funeral display, maybe. i’m not sure. the tenor of             
the whole conversation was somewhat threatening.”                                 
“i’d appreciate it if you’d help me pick them up before you go.”                  
“sure,” i said.                                                                   
“there are vases in the kitchen and the bathroom. come on.”                       
i followed her and collected several. on the way, i studied the object i          
had brought back from the other end of the sending. it was a blue button          
mounted in a gold setting, a few navy blue threads still attached. the cut        
stone bore a curved, four-limbed design. i showed it to flora and she shook       
her head.                                                                         
“it tells me nothing,” she said.                                                  
i dug into my pocket and produced the chips of stone from the crystal             
cave. they seemed to match. frakir stirred slightly when i passed the             
button near her, then lapsed again into quiescence, as if having given up on      
warning me about blue stones when i obviously never did anything about            
them.                                                                             
“strange,” i said.                                                                
“i’d like some roses on the night table,” flora told me, “and a couple of         
mixed displays on the dresser. you know, no one’s ever sent me flowers this       
way. it’s a rather intriguing introduction. are you sure they were for you?”      
i growled something anatomical or theological and gathered rosebuds.              
later, as we sat in the kitchen drinking coffee and musing, flora remarked,       
“this thing’s kind of spooky.”                                                    
“yes.”                                                                            
“maybe you ought to discuss it with fi after you’ve talked with                   
random.”                                                                          
“maybe.”                                                                          
“speaking of whom, shouldn’t you be calling random?”                              
“maybe.”                                                                          
“what do you mean, ‘maybe’? he’s got to be warned.”                               
“true. but i’ve a feeling that being safe won’t get any questions                 
answered for me.”                                                                 
“what do you have in mind, merle?”                                                
“do you have a car?”                                                              
“yes, i just got it a few days back. why?”                                        
i withdrew the button and the stones from my pocket, spread them on               
the table and regarded them again. “it just occurred to me while we were          
picking up flowers where i might have seen another of these.”                     
“yes?”                                                                            
“there is a memory i must have been blocking, because it was very                 
distressing: julia’s appearance when i found her. i seem to recall now that       
she had on a pendant with a blue stone. maybe it’s just coincidence, but”         
she nodded. “could be. but even so, the police probably have it now.”             
“oh, i don’t want the thing. but it reminds me that i didn’t really get to        
look over her apartment as well as i might have if i hadn’t had to leave in a     
hurry. i want to see it again before i go back to amber. i’m still puzzled as     
to how that—creature—got in.”                                                     
“what if the place has been cleaned out? or rented again?”                        
i shrugged. “only one way to find out.”                                           
“okay, i’ll drive you there.”                                                     
a few minutes later we were in her car and i was giving her directions.           
it was perhaps a twenty-minute drive beneath a sunny late-afternoon sky,          
stray clouds passing. i spent much of the time making certain preparations        
with logrus forces, and i was ready by the time we reached the proper area.       
“turn here and go around the block,” i said, gesturing. “i’ll show you            
where to park if there’s a place.”                                                
there was, close to the spot where i’d parked on that day.                        
when we were stopped beside the curb she glanced at me. “now what?                
do we just go up to the place and knock?”                                         
“i’m going to make us invisible,” i told her, “and i’m going to keep us           
that way till we’re inside. you’ll have to stay close to me in order for us to    
see each other, though.”                                                          
she nodded.                                                                       
“dworkin did it for me once,” she said, “when i was a child. spied on a           
lot of people then.” she chuckled. “i’d forgotten.”                               
i put the finishing touches to the elaborate spell and laid it upon us, the       
world growing dimmer beyond the windshield as i did. it was as if i               
regarded our surroundings through gray sunglasses as we slipped out the           
passenger side of the car. we walked slowly up to the corner and turned           
right.                                                                            
“is this a hard spell to learn?” she asked me. “it seems a very handy one         
to know.”                                                                         
“unfortunately, yes,” i said. “its biggest drawback is that you can’t just        
do it at a moment’s notice if you don’t have it hanging ready—and i didn’t.       
so, starting from scratch, it takes about twenty minutes to build.”               
we turned up the walk to the big old house.                                       
“which floor?” she asked me.                                                      
“top.”                                                                            
we climbed to the front door and found it locked. no doubt they were              
more particular about such matters these days.                                    
“break it?” flora whispered.                                                      
“too noisy,” i answered.                                                          
i placed my left hand upon the doorknob and gave frakir a silent                  
command. she unwound two turnings of her coil from about my wrist,                
coming into view as she moved across the lock plate and slithered into the        
keyhole. there followed a tightening, a stiffening and several rigid              
movements.                                                                        
a soft click meant the bolt was drawn, and i turned the knob and pulled           
gently. the door opened. frakir returned to bracelethood and invisibility.        
we entered, closing the door quietly behind us. we were not present in            
the wavery mirror. i led flora up the stairs.                                     
there were soft voices from one of the rooms on the second floor. that            
was all. no wind. no excited dogs. and the voices grew still before we            
reached the third floor.                                                          
i saw that the entire door to julia’s apartment had been replaced. it was         
slightly darker than the other and it sported a bright new lock. i tapped upon    
it gently and we waited. there was no response, but i knocked again after         
perhaps half a minute and we waited again.                                        
no one came. so i tried it. it was locked, but frakir repeated her trick          
and i hesitated. my hand shook as i recalled my last visit. i knew her            
mutilated corpse was no longer lying there. i knew no killer beast was            
waiting to attack me. yet the memory held me for several seconds.                 
“what’s the matter?” flora whispered.                                             
“nothing,” i said, and i pushed the door open.                                    
the place had been partly furnished, as i recalled. the part that had             
come with it remained—the sofa and end tables, several chairs, a larger           
table—but all julia’s own stuff was gone. there was a new rug on the floor,       
and the floor itself had been buffed recently. it did not appear that the place   
had been re-let, as there were no personal items of any sort about.               
we entered and i closed the door, dropping the spell that had cloaked us          
as i began my circuit through the rooms. the place brightened perceptibly         
as our magic veils faded.                                                         
“i don’t think you’re going to find anything,” flora said. “i can smell           
wax and disinfectant and paint…”                                                  
i nodded.                                                                         
“the more mundane possibilities seem to be excluded,” i said. “but                
there is something else i want to try.”                                           
i calmed my mind and called up the logrus-seeing. if there were any               
remaining traces of a magical working, i hoped i could spot them in this          
fashion. i wandered slowly then, through the living room, regarding               
everything from every possible angle. flora moved off, conducting her own         
investigation, which consisted mainly in looking under everything. the            
room flickered slightly for me as i scanned at those wavelengths where            
such a manifestation was most likely to be apparent—at least, that was the        
best way to describe the process in this shadow.                                  
nothing, large or small, escaped my scrutiny. but nothing was revealed            
to it. after long minutes i moved into the bedroom.                               
flora must have heard my sudden intake of breath, because she was into            
the room and at my side in seconds, and staring at the chest of drawers           
before which i stood.                                                             
“something in it?” she inquired, reaching forward, then withdrawing               
her hand.                                                                         
“no. behind it,” i said.                                                          
the chest of drawers had been moved in the course of painting the                 
apartment. it used to occupy a space several feet farther to the right. that      
which i now saw was visible to its left and above it, with more of it             
obviously blocked to my sight. i took hold of the thing and pushed it back        
to the right, to the position it had formerly occupied.                           
“i still don’t see anything,” flora said.                                         
i reached out and caught hold of her hand, extending the logrus force             
so that she, too, saw what i saw.                                                 
“why”—she raised her other hand and traced the faint rectangular                  
outline on the wall—“it looks like a…, doorway,” she said.                        
i studied it—a dim line of faded fire. the thing was obviously sealed             
and had been for some time. eventually it would fade completely and be            
gone.                                                                             
“it is a doorway,” i answered.                                                    
she pulled me back into the other room to regard the opposite side of             
the wall.                                                                         
“nothing here,” she observed. “it doesn’t go through.”                            
“now you’ve got the idea,” i said. “it goes somewhere else.”                      
“where?”                                                                          
“wherever the thing that killed julia came from.”                                 
“can you open it?”                                                                
“i am prepared to stand in front of it for as long as i have to,” i told her,     
“and try.”                                                                        
i returned to the other room and studied it once again.                           
“merlin,” she said, as i released her hand and raised mine before me,             
“don’t you think this is the point where you should get in touch with             
random, tell him exactly what has been happening and perhaps have                 
gerard standing next to you if you succeed in opening that door?”                 
“i probably should,” i agreed, “but i’m not going to.”                            
“why not?”                                                                        
“because he might tell me not to.”                                                
“he might be right, too.”                                                         
i lowered my hands and turned toward her. “i have to admit you have a             
point,” i said. “random has to be told everything, and i’ve probably put it       
off too long already. so here is what i would like you to do. go back to the      
car and wait. give me an hour. if i’m not out by then, get in touch with          
random, tell him everything i told you and tell him about this, too.”             
“i don’t know,” she said. “if you don’t show, random’s going to be mad            
at me.”                                                                           
“just tell him i insisted and there was nothing you could do. which is            
actually the case, if you stop to think about it.”                                
she pursed her lips. “i don’t like leaving you—though i’m not anxious             
to stay either. care to take along a hand grenade?”                               
she raised her purse and began to open it. “no. thanks. why do you                
have it, anyway?”                                                                 
she smiled. “i always carry them in this shadow. they sometimes come              
in handy. but okay, i’ll go wait.”                                                
she kissed me lightly on the cheek and turned away.                               
“and try to get hold of fiona,” i said, “if i don’t show. tell her the            
whole story, too. she might have a different angle on this.”                      
she nodded and departed. i waited until i heard the door close, then              
focused my attention fully upon the bright rectangle. its outline seemed          
fairly uniform, with only a few slightly thicker, brighter areas and a few        
finer, dimmer ones. i traced the lines slowly with the palm of my right hand      
at a height of about an inch above the wall’s surface. i felt a small prickling,  
a heatlike sensation as i did this. predictably, it was greater above the         
brighter areas. i took this as an indication that the seal was slightly less      
perfect in these spots. very well. i would soon discover whether the thing        
could be forced, and these would be my points of attack.                          
i twisted my hands deeper into the logrus until i wore the limbs i                
desired as fine-fingered gauntlets, stronger than metals, more sensitive than     
tongues in the places of their power. i moved my right hand to the point          
nearest it, on a level with my hip. i felt the pulse of an old spell when i       
touched that spot of greater brightness. i narrowed my extension as i             
pushed, making it finer and finer until it slipped through. the pulsing then      
became a steady thing. i repeated the exercise on a higher area to my left.       
i stood there, feeling the force that had sealed it, my fine filament             
extensions throbbing within its matrix. i tried moving them, first upward,        
then down. the right one slid a little farther than the left, in both directions, 
before a tightness and resistance halted it. i summoned more force from the       
body of the logrus, which swam specter-like within and before me, and i           
poured this energy into the gauntlets, the pattern of the logrus changing         
form again as i did so. when i tried once more to move it, the right one slid     
downward for perhaps a foot before the throbbing trapped it; when i pushed        
it upward it rose nearly to the top. i tried again on the left. it moved all the  
way to the top, but it only passed perhaps six inches below the starting point    
when i drew it downward.                                                          
i breathed deeply and felt myself beginning to perspire. i pumped more            
power into the gauntlets and forced their extensions farther downward. the        
resistance was even greater there, and the throbbing passed up my arms and        
into the very center of my being. i paused and rested, then raised the force      
to an even higher level of intensity. the logrus writhed again and i pushed       
both hands all the way to the floor, then knelt there panting before i began      
working my way along the bottom. the portal was obviously meant never             
to be opened again. there was no artistry for this, only brute force.             
when my forces met in the middle, i withdrew and regarded the work.               
to the right, to the left and along the bottom, the fine red lines had now        
become broad fiery ribbons. i could feel their pulsation across the distance      
that separated us.                                                                
i stood and raised my arms. i began to work along the top, starting at the        
corners, moving inward. it was easier than it had been earlier. the forces        
from the opened areas seemed to add a certain pressure, and my hands just         
flowed to the middle. when they met i seemed to hear something like a soft        
sighing sound. i dropped them and considered my work. the entire outline          
flared now. but more than that. it seemed almost as if the bright line were       
flowing, around and around…                                                       
i stood there for several minutes, regrouping, relaxing, settling. working        
up my nerve. all i knew was that the door would lead to a different shadow.       
that could mean anything. when i opened it something could, i suppose,            
leap out and attack me. but then, it had been sealed for some time. more          
probably any trap would be of a different sort. most likely, i would open it      
and nothing would happen. i would then have a choice of merely looking            
around from where i stood or entering. and there probably wouldn’t be             
very much to see, just standing there, looking…                                   
so i extended my logus members once again, taking hold of the door at             
either side, and i pushed. a yielding occurred on the side to my right, so i      
released my hold on the left. i continued my pressure on the right and the        
whole thing suddenly swung inward and away…                                       
i was looking down a pearly tunnel, which appeared to widen after a               
few paces. beyond that was a ripple effect, as of distant heat patterns above     
the road on a hot summer day. patches of redness and indeterminate dark           
shapes swam within it. i waited for perhaps half a minute, but nothing            
approached.                                                                       
i prepared frakir for trouble. i maintained my logrus connection. i               
advanced, extending probes before me. i passed within.                            
a sudden change in the pressure gradient at my back caused me to cast             
a quick glance in that direction. the doorway had closed and dwindled,            
now appearing to me in the distance as a tiny red cube. my several steps          
could, of course, have borne me a great distance also, should the rules of        
this space so operate.                                                            
i continued, and a hot wind flowed toward me, engulfed me, stayed with            
me. the sides of my passageway receded, the prospect before me continued          
to shimmer and dance, and my pace became more labored, as if i were               
suddenly walking uphill. i heard something like a grunt from beyond the           
place where my vision misbehaved, and my left logrus probe encountered            
something that it jolted slightly. frakir began to throb simultaneous with my     
sensing an aura of menace through the probe. i sighed. i hadn’t expected          
this was going to be easy. if i’d been running the show i wouldn’t have let       
things go with just sealing the door.                                             
“all right, asshole! hold it right there!” a voice boomed from ahead. i           
continued to trudge forward.                                                      
it came again. “i said halt!”                                                     
things began to swim into place as i advanced, and suddenly there were            
rough walls to my right and left and a roof overhead, narrowing,                  
converging…                                                                       
a huge rotund figure barred my way, looking like a purple buddha with             
bat ears. details resolved themselves as i drew nearer: protruding fangs,         
yellow eyes that seemed to be lidless, long red claws on its great hands and      
feet. it was seated in the middle of the tunnel and made no effort to rise. it    
wore no clothing, but its great swollen belly rested upon its knees,              
concealing its sex. its voice had been gruffly masculine, however, and its        
odor generically foul.                                                            
“hi,” i said. “nice day, wasn’t it?”                                              
it growled and the temperature seemed to rise slightly. frakir had grown          
frantic and i calmed her mentally.                                                
the creature leaned forward and with one bright nail inscribed a                  
smoking line in the stone of the floor. i halted before it.                       
“cross that line, sorcerer, and you’ve had it,” it said.                          
“why?” i asked.                                                                   
“because i said so.”                                                              
“if you’re collecting tolls,” i suggested, “name the price.”                      
it shook its head. “you can’t buy your way past me.”                              
“uh—what makes you think i’m a sorcerer?”                                         
it opened the dingy cavern of its face, displaying even more lurking              
teeth than i’d suspected, and it did something like the rattling of a tin sheet   
way down deep in back.                                                            
“i felt that little probe of yours,” it said. “it’s a sorcerer’s trick. besides,  
nobody but a sorcerer could have gotten to the place where you’re                 
standing.”                                                                        
“you do not seem to possess a great deal of respect for the profession.”          
“i eat sorcerers,” it told me.                                                    
i made a face, thinking back over some of the old farts i’ve known in             
the business.                                                                     
“to each, his, her or its own, i guess,” i told it. “so what’s the deal? a        
passage is no good unless you can get through it. how do i get by here?”          
“you don’t.”                                                                      
“not even if i answer a riddle?”                                                  
“that won’t do it for me,” it said. but a small gleam came into its eye.          
“just for the hell of it, though, what’s green and red and goes round and         
round and round?” it asked.                                                       
“you know the sphinx!”                                                            
“shit!” it said. “you’ve heard it.”                                               
i shrugged. “i get around.”                                                       
“not here you don’t.”                                                             
i studied it. it had to have some special defense against magical attacks         
if it were set to stop sorcerers. as for physical defense it was fairly           
imposing. i wondered how fast it was. could i just dive past and start            
running? i decided that i did not wish to experiment along that line.             
“i really do have to get through,” i tried. “it’s an emergency.”                  
“tough.”                                                                          
“look, what do you get out of this, anyway? it seems like a pretty                
crummy job, sitting here in the middle of a tunnel.”                              
“i love my work. i was created for it.”                                           
“how come you let the sphinx come and go?”                                        
“magical beings don’t count.”                                                     
“hm.”                                                                             
“and don’t try to tell me you’re really a magical being, and then pull            
some sorcerous illusion. i can see right through that stuff.”                     
“i believe you. what’s your name, anyhow?”                                        
it snorted. “you can call me scrof, for conversational purposes.                  
yourself?”                                                                        
“call me corey.”                                                                  
“okay, corey. i don’t mind sitting here bullshitting with you, because            
that’s covered by the rules. it’s allowed. you’ve got three choices and one       
of them would be real stupid. you can turn around and go back the way you         
came and be none the worse for wear. you can also camp right where you            
are for as long as you like and i won’t lift a finger so long as you behave.      
the dumb thing to do would be to cross this line i’ve drawn. then i’d             
terminate you. this is the threshold and i am the dweller on it. i don’t let      
anybody get by.”                                                                  
“i appreciate your making it clear.”                                              
“it’s part of the job. so what’ll it be?”                                         
i raised my hands and the lines of force twisted like knives at each              
fingertip. frakir dangled from my wrist and began to swing in an elaborate        
pattern.                                                                          
scrof smiled. “i not only eat sorcerers, i eat their magic, too. only a           
being torn from the primal chaos can make that claim. so come ahead, if           
you think you can face that.”                                                     
“chaos, eh? torn from the primal chaos?”                                          
“yep. there’s not much can stand against it.”                                     
“except maybe a lord of chaos,” i replied, as i shifted my awareness to           
various points within my body. rough work. the faster you do it the more          
painful it is.                                                                    
again, the rattling of the tin sheet.                                             
“you know what the odds are against a chaos lord coming this far to               
go two out of three with a dweller?” scrof said.                                  
my arms began to lengthen and i felt my shirt tear across my back as i            
leaned forward. the bones in my face shifted about and my chest expanded          
and expanded…                                                                     
“one out of one should be enough,” i replied, when the transformation             
was complete.                                                                     
“shit,” scrof said as i crossed the line.                                         
                                                                     
chapter 3                                                                         
i stood just within the mouth of the cave for some time, my left shoulder         
hurting and my right leg sore also. if i could get the pain under control         
before i retransformed myself there was a chance that much of it would            
fade during the anatomical reshuffling. the process itself would probably         
leave me pretty tired, however. it takes a lot of energy, and switching twice     
this close together could be somewhat prostrating, following my bout with         
the dweller. so i rested within the cave into which the pearly tunnel had         
eventually debouched, and i regarded the prospect before me.                      
far down and to my left was a bright blue and very troubled body of               
water. white-crested waves expired in kamikaze attacks on the gray rocks          
of the shore; a strong wind scattered their spray and a piece of rainbow          
hung within the mist.                                                             
before me and below me was a pocked, cracked and steaming land                    
which trembled periodically, as it swept for well over a mile toward the          
high dark walls of an amazingly huge and complex structure, which i               
immediately christened gormenghast. it was a hodgepodge of architectural          
styles, bigger even than the palace at amber and somber as all hell. also, it     
was under attack.                                                                 
there were quite a few troops in the field before the walls, most of them         
in a distant non-scorched area of more normal terrain and some vegetation,        
though the grasses were well trampled and many trees shattered. the               
besiegers were equipped with scaling ladders and a battering ram; but the         
ram was idle at the moment and the ladders were on the ground. what               
appeared to have been an entire village of outbuildings smoldered darkly at       
the wall’s base. numerous sprawled figures were, i assumed, casualties.           
moving my gaze even farther to the right, i encountered an area of                
brilliant whiteness beyond that great citadel. it looked to be the projecting     
edge of a massive glacier, and gusts of snow or ice crystals were whipped         
about it in a fashion similar to the sea mists far to my left.                    
the wind seemed a constant traveler through these parts. i heard it cry           
out high above me. when i finally stepped outside to look upward, i found         
that i was only about halfway up a massive stony hillside—or low                  
mountainside, depending on how one regards such matters—and the                   
whining note of the wind came down even more loudly from those broken             
heights. there was also a thump at my back, and when i turned i could no          
longer locate the cave mouth. my journey along the route from the fiery           
door had been completed once i exited the cave, and its spell had apparently      
clamped down and closed the way immediately. i supposed that i could              
locate the outline upon the steep wall if i wanted to, but at the moment i had    
no such desire. i made a little pile of stones before it, and then i looked       
about again, studying details.                                                    
a narrow trail curved off to my right and back among some standing                
stones. i headed in that direction. i smelled smoke. whether it was from the      
battle site or the area of volcanism below i could not tell. the sky was a        
patchwork of cloud and light above me. when i halted between two of the           
stones and turned to regard the scene below once again, i saw that the            
attackers had formed themselves into new groups and that the ladders were         
being home toward the walls. i also saw what looked like a tornado rise on        
the far side of the citadel and begin a slow counterclockwise movement            
about the walls. if it continued on its route it would eventually reach the       
attackers. neat trick. fortunately it was their problem and not mine.             
i worked my way back into a stony declivity and settled myself upon a             
low ledge. i began the troublesome shapeshifting work, which i paced to           
take me half an hour or so. changing from something nominally human to            
something rare and strange—perhaps monstrous to some, perhaps                     
frightening—and then back again is a concept some may find repugnant.             
they shouldn’t. we all of us do it every day in many different ways, don’t        
we?                                                                               
when the transformation was completed i lay back, breathing deeply,               
and listened to the wind. i was sheltered from its force by the stones and        
only its song came down to me. i felt vibrations from distant tremors of the      
earth and chose to take them as a gentle massage, soothing… my clothes            
were in tatters, and for the moment i was too tired to summon a fresh outfit.     
my shoulder seemed to have lost its pain, and there was only the slightest        
twinge in my leg, fading, fading… i closed my eyes for a few moments.             
okay, i’d made it through, and i’d a strong feeling that the answer to the        
matter of julia’s killer lay in the besieged citadel below. offhand, i didn’t     
see any easy way into the place at the moment, to make inquiry. but that          
was not the only way i might proceed. i decided to wait where i was,              
resting, until it grew dark—that is, if things here proceeded in a normal         
dark-light fashion. then i’d slip downstairs, kidnap one of the besiegers and     
question him. yes. and if it didn’t get dark? then i’d think of something         
else. right now, though, just drifting felt best…                                 
for how long i dozed, i was uncertain. what roused me was the clicking of         
pebbles, from somewhere off to the right. i was instantly alert, though i         
didn’t stir. there was no effort at stealth, and the pattern of approaching       
sounds—mainly slapping footfalls, as of someone wearing loose sandals—            
convinced me that only a single individual was moving in this direction. i        
tensed and relaxed my muscles and drew a few deep breaths.                        
a very hairy man emerged from between two of the stones to my right.              
he was about five and a half feet in height, very dirty, and he wore a dark       
animal skin about his loins; also, he had on a pair of sandals. he stared at      
me for several seconds before displaying the yellow irregularities of his         
smile.                                                                            
“hello. are you injured?” he asked, in a debased form of thari that i             
did not recall ever having heard before.                                          
i stretched to make sure and then stood. “no,” i replied. “why do you             
ask that?”                                                                        
the smile persisted. “i thought maybe you’d had enough of the fighting            
below and decided to call it quits.”                                              
“oh, i see. no, it’s not exactly like that…”                                      
he nodded and stepped forward. “dave’s my name. what’s yours?”                    
“merle,” i said, clasping his grimy hand.                                         
“not to worry, merle,” he told me. “i wouldn’t turn in anybody who                
decided to take a walk from a war, unless maybe there was a reward and            
there ain’t on this one. did it myself years ago and never regretted it. mine     
was goin’ the same way this one seems to be goin’, and i had sense enough         
to get out. no army’s ever taken that place down there, and i don’t think         
one ever will.”                                                                   
“what place is it?”                                                               
he cocked his head and squinted, then shrugged. “keep of the four                 
worlds,” he said. “didn’t the recruiter tell you anything?”                       
i sighed. “nope,” i said.                                                         
“wouldn’t have any smokin’ stuff on you, would you?”                              
“no,” i answered, having used all my pipe tobacco back in the crystal             
cave. “sorry.”                                                                    
i moved past him to a point where i could look downward from between              
the stones. i wanted another look at the keep of the four worlds. after all,      
it was the answer to a riddle as well as the subject of numerous cryptic          
references in melman’s diary. fresh bodies were scattered all over before its     
walls, as if cast about by the whirlwind, which was now circling back             
toward the point whence it had risen. but a small party of besiegers had          
apparently made it to the top of the wall despite this. and a fresh party had     
formed below and was headed for the ladders. one of its members bore a            
banner i could not place, but which seemed vaguely familiar—black and             
green, with what might be a couple of heraldic beasts having a go at each         
other. two ladders were still in place, and i could see some fierce fighting      
going on behind the battlements.                                                  
“some of the attackers seem to have gotten in,” i said.                           
dave hurried up beside me and stared. i immediately moved upwind.                 
“you’re right,” he acknowledged. “now, that’s a first. if they can get            
that damn gate open and let the others in they might even have a chance.          
never thought i’d live to see it.”                                                
“how long ago was it,” i asked, “when the army you were with attacked             
the place?”                                                                       
“must be eight, nine—maybe ten years,” he muttered. “those guys                   
must be pretty good.”                                                             
“what’s it all about?” i asked.                                                   
he turned and studied me.                                                         
“you really don’t know?”                                                          
“just got here,” i said.                                                          
“hungry? thirsty?”                                                                
“as a matter of fact, yes.”                                                       
“come on, then.” he took hold of my arm and steered me back between               
the stones, then led me along a narrow trail.                                     
“where are we headed?” i asked.                                                   
“i live nearby. i make it a point to feed deserters, for old times’ sake. i’ll    
make an exception for you.”                                                       
“thanks.” the trail split after a short while, and he took the right-hand         
branch, which involved some climbing. eventually this led us to a series of       
rocky shelves, the last of which receded for a considerable distance. there       
were a number of clefts at its rear, into one of which he ducked. i followed      
him a short distance along it, and he halted before a low cave mouth. a           
horrible odor of putrefaction drifted forth, and i could hear the buzzing of      
flies within.                                                                     
“this is my place,” he announced. “i’d invite you in, but it’s a little uh        
—”                                                                                
“that’s okay,” i said. “i’ll wait.”                                               
he ducked inside, and i realized that my appetite was rapidly vanishing,          
especially when it came to anything he might have stored in that place.           
moments later he emerged, a duffel bag slung over his shoulder. “got some         
good stuff in here,” he announced.                                                
i started walking back along the cleft.                                           
“hey! where you headed?”                                                          
“air,” i said. “i’m going back out on the shelf. it’s a bit close back            
there.”                                                                           
“oh. okay,” he said, and he fell into step behind me.                             
he had two unopened bottles of wine, several canteens of water, a fresh-          
looking loaf of bread, some tinned meat, a few firm apples and an uncut           
head of cheese in the bag, i discovered, after we’d seated ourselves on a         
ledge out in the open and he’d gestured for me to open the thing and serve        
myself. having prudently remained upwind, i took some water and an apple          
for openers.                                                                      
“place has a stormy history,” he stated, withdrawing a small knife from           
his girdle and cutting himself a piece of cheese. “i’m not sure who built it      
or how long it’s been there.”                                                     
when i saw that he was about to dig the cork out of a wine bottle with            
the knife i halted him and essayed a small and surreptitious logrus sending.      
the response was quick, and i passed him the corkscrew immediately. he            
handed me the entire bottle after he’d uncorked it and opened the other for       
himself. for reasons involving public health i was grateful, though i wasn’t      
in the mood for that much wine.                                                   
“that’s what i call being prepared,” he said, studying the corkscrew.             
“i’ve needed one of these for some time…”                                         
“keep it,” i told him. “tell me more about that place. who lives there?           
how did you come to be part of an invading army? who’s attacking it               
now?”                                                                             
he nodded and took a swig of wine.                                                
“the earliest boss of the place that i know of was a wizard named sharu           
garrul. the queen of my country departed suddenly and came here.” he              
paused and stared off into the distance for a time, then snorted. “politics! i    
don’t even know what the given reason for the visit was at the time. i’d          
never heard of the damned place in those days. anyhow, she stayed a long          
while and people began to wonder. was she a prisoner? was she working             
out an alliance? was she having an affair? i gather she sent back messages        
periodically, but they were the usual bland crap that didn’t say anything—        
unless of course there were also secret communications folks like me              
wouldn’t have heard about. she had a pretty good-sized retinue with her,          
too, with an honor guard that was not just for show. these guys were very         
tough veterans, even though they dressed pretty. so it was kind of debatable      
what was going on at that point.”                                                 
“a question, if i may,” i said. “what was your king’s part in all this?           
you didn’t mention him, and it would seem he ought to know—”                      
“dead,” he announced. “she made a lovely widow, and there was a lot               
of pressure on her to remarry. but she just took a succession of lovers and       
played the different factions off against each other. usually her men were        
military leaders or powerful nobles, or both. she’d left her son in charge        
when she made this trip, though.”                                                 
“oh, so there was a prince old enough to sit in control?”                         
“yes. in fact, he started the damned war. he raised troops and wasn’t             
happy with the muster, so he got in touch with a childhood friend, a man          
generally considered an outlaw, but who commanded a large band of                 
mercenaries. name of dalt.”                                                       
“stop!” i said.                                                                   
my mind raced as i recalled a story gerard had once told me, about a              
strange man named dalt who had led a private army against amber,                  
unusually effectively. benedict himself had had to be recalled to oppose          
him. the man’s forces had been defeated at the foot of kolvir, and dalt           
himself severely wounded. though no one ever saw his body, it was                 
assumed he would have died of such injuries. but there was more.                  
“your home,” i said. “you never named it. where are you from, dave?”              
“a place called kashfa,” he replied.                                              
“and jasra was your queen?”                                                       
“you’ve heard of us. where’re you from?”                                          
“san francisco,” i said.                                                          
he shook his head. “don’t know the place.”                                        
“who does? listen, how good are your eyes?”                                       
“what do you mean?”                                                               
“a little while ago, when we looked down on the lighting, could you               
make out the flag the attackers were carrying?”                                   
“eyes ain’t what they used to be,” he said.                                       
“it was green and black with some sort of animals on it.”                         
he whistled. “a lion rending a unicorn, i’ll bet. sounds like dalt’s.”            
“what is the significance of that device?”                                        
“he hates them amberites, is what it means. even went up against them             
once.”                                                                            
i tasted the wine. not bad. the same man, then…                                   
“you know why he hates them?” i asked.                                            
“i understand they killed his mother,” he said. “had something to do              
with border wars. they get real complicated. i don’t know the details.”           
i pried open a tin of meat, broke off some bread and made myself a                
sandwich.                                                                         
“please go ahead with your story,” i said.                                        
“where was i?”                                                                    
“the prince got hold of dalt because he was concerned about his                   
mother, and he needed more troops in a hurry.”                                    
“that’s right, and i was picked up for kashfan service about that time—           
foot soldier. the prince and dalt led us through dark ways till we came to        
that place below. then we did just what them guys downstairs were doing.”         
“and what happened?”                                                              
he laughed. “went bad for us at first,” he said. “i think it’s somehow            
easy for whoever’s in charge down there to control the elements—like that         
twister you saw a while ago. we got an earthquake and a blizzard and              
lightning. but we pressed on to the walls anyhow. saw my brother scalded          
to death with boiling oil. that’s when i decided i’d had enough. i started        
running and climbed on up here. nobody chased me, so i waited around and          
watched. probably shouldn’t have, but i didn’t know how things would go.          
more of the same, i’d figgered. but i was wrong, and it was too late to go        
back. they’d have whacked off my head or some other valuable parts if i           
did.”                                                                             
“what happened?”                                                                  
“i got the impression that the attack forced jasra’s hand. she’d                  
apparently been planning to do away with sharu garrul all along and take          
over the place herself. i think she’d been setting him up, gaining his            
confidence before she struck. i believe she was a little afraid of the old man.   
but when her army appeared on the doorstep she had to move, even though           
she wasn’t ready. she took him on in a sorcerous duel while her guard held        
his men at bay. she won, though i gather she was somewhat injured. mad as         
hell, too, at her son—for bringing in an army without her ordering it.            
anyway, her guard opened the gates to them, and she took over the keep.           
that’s what i meant about no army taking the place. that one was an inside        
job.”                                                                             
“how did you learn all this?”                                                     
“like i said, when deserters head this way i feed ’em and get the news.”          
“you gave me the impression that there have been other attempts to take           
the place. these would have had to be after she’d taken over.”                    
he nodded and took another drink of wine.                                         
“yup. there was apparently a coup back in kashfa, with both her and               
her kid away—a noble named kasman, brother of one of her dead lovers, a           
fellow named jasrick. this kasman took over, and he wanted her and the            
prince out of the way. must’ve attacked this place half a dozen times. never      
could get in. finally resigned himself to a standoff, i think. she sent her son   
off somewhere later, maybe to raise another army and try to win back her          
throne. i don’t know. that was long ago.”                                         
“what about dalt?”                                                                
“they paid him off with some loot from the keep—there was                         
apparently a lot of good stuff in there—and he took his troops and went           
back to wherever he hangs out.”                                                   
i took another sip of wine myself and cut off a piece of the cheese.              
“how come you’ve stayed around all these years? it seems like a hard life.”       
he nodded. “truth of it is, i don’t know the way home. those were                 
strange trails they brought us in on. i thought i knew where they were, but       
when i went lookin’ i couldn’t never find ’em. i suppose i could have just        
taken off, but then i’d probably get lost more than ever. besides, i know i       
can make out here. a few weeks and those outbuildings will be rebuilt and         
the peasants will move back in, no matter who wins. and they think i’m a          
holy man, prayin’ up here and meditatin’. any time i wander down that             
way they come out for a blessin’ and give me enough food and drink to             
hold me for a long while.”                                                        
“are you a holy man?” i asked.                                                    
“i just pretend,” he said. “makes them happy and keeps me fed. don’t              
go tellin’ that, though.”                                                         
“of course not. they wouldn’t believe me, anyway.”                                
he laughed again. “you’re right.”                                                 
i got to my feet and walked back along the trail a little way, so that i          
could see the keep once again. the ladders were on the ground, and i              
beheld even more scattered dead. i saw no signs of the struggle within.           
“is the gate open yet?” dave called.                                              
“no. i don’t think the ones who got in were sufficient to the task.”              
“is that green and black banner anywhere in sight?”                               
“i can’t see it anywhere.”                                                        
he rose and came over, carrying both bottles. he passed me mine and               
we both took a drink. the ground troops began to fall back from the area          
before the wall.                                                                  
“think they’re giving up or reforming for another rush?” he asked me.             
“can’t say yet,” i told him.                                                      
“whichever it is, there should be a lot of good loot down there tonight.          
stick around and you’ll have all you can carry.”                                  
“i’m curious,” i said, “why dalt would be attacking again, if he’s on             
good terms with the queen and her son.”                                           
“i think it’s just the son,” he said, “and he’s gone. the old lady’s              
supposed to be a real bitch. and after all, the guy is a mercenary. maybe         
kasman hired him to go after her.”                                                
“maybe she’s not even in there,” i said, having no idea how this time             
stream ran, but thinking of my recent encounter with the lady. the image of       
it, though, caused a strange train of thought.                                    
“what’s the prince’s name, anyway?” i asked.                                      
“rinaldo,” he answered. “he’s a big red-haired guy.”                              
“she’s his mother!” i said involuntarily.                                         
he laughed. “that’s how you get to be a prince,” he said. “have the               
queen be your mother.”                                                            
but then, that would mean… “brand!” i said. then, “brand of amber.”               
he nodded. “you’ve heard the story.”                                              
“not really. just that much,” i replied. “tell it to me.”                         
“well, she snared herself an amberite—the prince called brand,” he                
said. “rumor had it they met over some magical operation and it was love          
at first blood. she wanted to keep him, and i’ve heard it said they actually      
were married in a secret ceremony. but he wasn’t interested in the throne of      
kashfa, though he was the only one she might have been willing to see on          
it. he traveled a lot, was away for long stretches of time. i’ve heard it said    
that he was responsible for the days of darkness years ago, and that he died      
in a great battle between chaos and amber at that time, at the hands of his       
kinsmen.”                                                                         
“yes,” i said, and dave gave me a strange look, half puzzlement, half             
scrutiny. “tell me more about rinaldo,” i said quickly.                           
“not much to say,” he replied. “she bore him, and i’ve heard she taught           
him something of her arts. he didn’t know his father all that well, brand         
being away so much. kind of a wild kid. ran away any number of times              
and hung out with a band of outlaws—”                                             
“dalt’s people?” i asked.                                                         
he nodded. “rode with them, they say—even though his mother’d                     
placed bounties on many of their heads at that time.”                             
“wait a minute. you say that she really hated these outlaws and                   
mercenaries—”                                                                     
“ ‘hate’ may be the wrong word. she’d never bothered about them                   
before, but when her son got friendly with them i think she just got mad.”        
“she thought they were a bad influence?”                                          
“no, i think she didn’t like it that he’d run to them and they’d take him         
in whenever he had a falling out with her.”                                       
“yet you say that she saw dalt paid off out of the keep’s treasure and            
allowed him to ride away, after they’d forced her hand against sharu              
garrul.”                                                                          
“yup. big argument at the time, too, between rinaldo and his mom,                 
over just that point. and she finally gave in. that’s the way i heard it from a   
couple of guys who were there. one of the few times the boy actually stood        
up to her and won, they say. in fact, that’s why the guys deserted. she           
ordered all witnesses to their argument executed, they told me. they were         
the only ones managed to get away.”                                               
“tough lady.”                                                                     
“yup.”                                                                            
we walked on back to the area where we’d been seated and ate some                 
more food. the song of the wind rose in pitch and a storm began out at sea.       
i asked dave about big doglike creatures, and he told me that packs of them       
would probably be feasting on the battle’s victims tonight. they were native      
to the area.                                                                      
“we divide the spoils,” he said. “i want the rations, the wine and any            
valuables. they just want the dead.”                                              
“what good are the valuables to you?” i said.                                     
he looked suddenly apprehensive, as if i were considering the                     
possibility of robbing him.                                                       
“oh, it don’t really amount to much. it’s just that i’ve always been a            
thrifty person,” he said, “and i make it sound more important than it is. you     
never can tell,” he added.                                                        
“that’s true,” i agreed.                                                          
“how’d you get here anyway, merle?” he asked quickly, as if to get my             
mind off the subject of his loot.                                                 
“walked,” i said.                                                                 
“that don’t sound right. nobody comes here willingly.”                            
“i didn’t know i was coming here. don’t think i’ll be staying long                
either,” i said, as i saw him take up the small knife and begin toying with it.   
“no sense going below and begging after hospitality at a time like this.”         
“that’s true,” he remarked.                                                       
was the old coot actually thinking of attacking me, to protect his cache?         
he could be more than a little mad by now, living up here alone in his            
stinking cave, pretending to be a saint.                                          
“would you be interested in returning to kashfa,” i said, “if i could set         
you on the right trail?”                                                          
he gave me a crafty look. “you don’t know that much about kashfa,”                
he said, “or you wouldn’t have been asking me all those questions. now            
you say you can send me home?”                                                    
“i take it you’re not interested?”                                                
he sighed. “not really, not any more. it’s too late now. this is my               
home. i enjoy being a hermit.”                                                    
i shrugged. “well, thanks for feeding me, and thanks for all the news.” i         
got to my feet.                                                                   
“where are you going now?” he asked.                                              
“i think i’ll look around some, then head for home.” i backed away                
from that small lunatic glow in his eyes.                                         
he raised the knife, his grip tightened on it. then he lowered it and cut         
another piece of cheese.                                                          
“here, you can take some of the cheese with you if you want,” he said.            
“no, that’s okay. thanks.”                                                        
“just trying to save you some money. have a good trip.”                           
“right. take it easy.”                                                            
i heard his chuckling all the way back to the trail. then the wind                
drowned it.                                                                       
i spent the next several hours reconnoitering. i moved around in the hills. i     
descended into the steaming, quaking lands. i walked along the seashore. i        
passed through the rear of the normal-seeming area and crossed the neck of        
the ice field. in all of this, i stayed as far from the keep itself as possible. i
wanted to fix the place as firmly in mind as i could, so that i could find my     
way back through shadow rather than crossing a threshold the hard way. i          
saw several packs of wild dogs on my journey, but they were more intent           
upon the battle’s corpses than anything that moved.                               
there were oddly inscribed boundary stones at each topographical                  
border, and i found myself wondering whether they were mapmakers’ aids            
or something more. finally, i wrestled one from the burning land over about       
fifteen feet into a region of ice and snow. i was knocked down almost             
immediately by a heavy tremor; i was able to scramble away in time,               
however, from the opening of a crevice and the spewing of geysers. the hot        
area claimed that small slice of the cold land in less than half an hour.         
fortunately, i moved quickly to get out of the way of any further turmoil,        
and i observed the balance of these phenomena from a distance. but there          
was more to come.                                                                 
i crouched back among the rocks, having reached the foothills of the              
range from which i had started by crossing through a section of the volcanic      
area. there, i rested and watched for a time while that small segment of          
terrain rearranged itself and the wind smeared smoke and steam across the         
land. rocks bounced and rolled; dark carrion birds went out of their way to       
avoid what had to be some interesting thermals.                                   
then i beheld a movement which i first assumed to be seismic in origin.           
the boundary stone i had shifted rose slightly and jogged to the side. a          
moment later, however, and it was elevated even farther, appearing almost         
as if it had been levitated slightly above the ground. then it drifted across     
the blasted area, moving in a straight line at a uniform speed, until—as          
nearly as i could judge—it had recovered its earlier position. and there it       
settled. moments later the turmoil recommenced, and this time it was a            
jolting shrug of the ice sheet, jerking back, reclaiming the invaded area.        
i called up my logrus sight, and i was able to make out a dark glow               
surrounding the stone. this was connected by a long, straight, steady stream      
of light of the same general hue, extending from a high rear tower of the         
keep. fascinating. i would have given a lot for a view of the interior of that    
place.                                                                            
then, born with a sigh, maturing to a whistle, a whirlwind rose from the          
disputed area, growing, graying, swaying, to advance suddenly toward me           
like the swung proboscis of some cloudy, sky-high elephant. i turned and          
climbed higher, weaving my way amid rocks and around the shoulders of             
hillsides. the thing pursued, as if there were an intelligence guiding its        
movements. and the way it hung together while traversing that irregular           
terrain indicated an artificial nature, which in this place most likely meant     
magic.                                                                            
it takes some time to determine an appropriate magical defense, and               
even more time to bring it into being. unfortunately, i was only about a          
minute ahead of the posse, and that margin was probably dwindling.                
when i spotted the long narrow crevice beyond the next turning, jagged            
as a limb of lightning, i paused only an instant to peer into its depth, and      
then i was descending, my tattered garments lashed about me, the windy            
tower a rumbling presence at my back…                                             
the way ran deep and so did i, following its jogs, its twistings. the             
rumble rose to a roar, and i coughed at the cloud of dust that engulfed me.       
a hailstorm of gravel assailed me. i threw myself flat then, about eight feet     
below the surface of the land, and covered my head with my arms, for i            
believed that the thing was about to pass directly above me.                      
i muttered warding spells as i lay there, despite their minuscule parrying        
effect at this distance against such an energy-intensive manifestation. i did     
not jump up when the silence came. it could be that the tornado’s driver had      
withdrawn support and collapsed the funnel on seeing that i might be out of       
reach. it could also be the eye of the storm, with more to come, by and by.       
while i did not jump up, i did look up, because i hate to miss                    
educational opportunities.                                                        
and there was the face—or, rather, the mask—at the center of the                  
storm, regarding me. it was a projection, of course, larger than life and not     
fully substantial. the head was cowled; the mask was full and cobalt bright       
and strongly reminiscent of the sort worn by goalies in ice hockey; there         
were two vertical breathing slits from which pale smoke emerged—a touch           
too theatrical for my taste; a lower series of random punctures was designed      
to give the impression of a sardonically lopsided mouth. a distorted sound        
of laughter came down to me from it.                                              
“aren’t you overdoing it a bit?” i said, coming up into a crouch and              
raising the logrus between us. “for a kid on halloween, yes. but we’re all        
adults here, aren’t we? a simple domino would probably serve—”                    
“you moved my stone!” it said.                                                    
“i’ve a certain academic interest in such matters,” i offered, easing             
myself into the extensions. “nothing to get upset about. is that you, jasra? i    
—”                                                                                
the rumbling began again, softly at first, then building once more.               
“i’ll make a deal,” i said. “you call off the storm, and i’ll promise not to      
move any more markers.”                                                           
again, the laughter as the storm sounds rose.                                     
“too late,” came the reply. “too late for you. unless you’re a lot                
tougher than you look.”                                                           
what the hell! the battle is not always to the strong, and nice guys tend         
to win because they’re the ones who get to write their memoirs. i’d been          
fiddling with the logrus projections against the insubstantiality of the mask     
until i found the link, the opening leading back to its source. i stabbed         
through it—a thing on the order of an electrical discharge—at whatever lay        
behind.                                                                           
there came a scream. the mask collapsed, the storm collapsed, and i               
was on my feet and running again. when whatever i’d hit recovered i did           
not want to be in the same place i had been because that place might be           
subject to sudden disintegration.                                                 
i had a choice of cutting off into shadow or seeking an even faster path          
of retreat. if a sorcerer were to tag me as i started shadow-slipping i could     
be followed. so i dug out my trumps and shuffled forth random’s. i                
rounded the next turning of the way then, and i would have had to halt there      
anyway, i saw, because it narrowed to a width impossible for me to pass. i        
raised the card and reached with my mind.                                         
there followed contact, almost immediately. but even as the images                
solidified i felt a probe. i was certain that it was my blue-masked nemesis       
seeking me once more.                                                             
but random came clear, seated before a drum set, sticks in hand. he set           
aside the drumsticks and rose.                                                    
“it’s about time,” he said, and he extended his hand.                             
even as i reached i felt something rushing toward me. as our fingers              
touched and i stepped forward, they burst about me like a giant wave.             
i passed through into the music room in amber. random had opened his              
mouth to speak again when the cascade of flowers fell upon us.                    
brushing violets from his shirtfront, he regarded me.                             
“i’d rather you said it with words,” he remarked.                                 
                                                                     
chapter 4                                                                         
portrait of the artists, purposes crossed, temperature falling…                   
sunny afternoon, and walking through small park following light lunch,            
us, prolonged silences and monosyllabic responses to conversational sallies       
indicating all’s not well at other end of communication’s taut line. upon         
bench, seated then, facing flower beds, souls catch up with bodies, words         
with thoughts…                                                                    
“okay, merle. what’s the score?” she asks.                                        
“i don’t know what game you’re talking about, julia.”                             
“don’t get cute. all i want’s a straight answer.”                                 
“what’s the question?”                                                            
“that place you took me, from the beach, that night… where was it?”               
“it was—sort of a dream.”                                                         
“bullshit!” she turns sideways to face me fully, and i must meet those            
flashing eyes without my face giving anything away. “i’ve been back there,        
several times, looking for the way we took. there is no cave. there’s             
nothing! what happened to it? what’s going on?”                                   
“maybe the tide came in and—”                                                     
“merle! what kind of an idiot do you take me for? that walk we took               
isn’t on the maps. nobody around here’s ever heard of anything like those         
places. it was geographically impossible. the times of day and the seasons        
kept shifting. the only explanation is supernatural or paranormal—                
whatever you want to call it, what happened? you owe me an answer and             
you know it. what happened? where were you?”                                      
i look away, past my feet, past the flowers. “i—can’t say.”                       
“why not?”                                                                        
“i—” what could i say? it was not only that telling her of shadow                 
would disturb, perhaps destroy, her view of reality. at the heart of my           
problem lay the realization that it would also require telling her how i knew     
this, which would mean telling her who i am, where i am from, what i am           
—and i was afraid to give her this knowledge. i told myself that it would         
end our relationship as surely as telling her nothing would; and if it must       
end either way, i would rather we parted without her possessing this              
knowledge. later, much later, i was to see this for the rationalization it was;   
my real reason for denying her the answers she desired was that i was not         
ready to trust her, or anyone, so close to me as i really am. had i known her     
longer, better—another year, say—i might have answered her. i don’t know.         
we never used the word “love,” though it must have run through her mind           
on occasion, as it did through mine. it was, i suppose, that i didn’t love her    
enough to trust her, and then it was too late. so, “i can’t tell you,” were my    
words.                                                                            
“you have some power that you will not share.”                                    
“call it that, then.”                                                             
“i would do whatever you say, promise whatever you want promised.”                
“there is a reason, julia.”                                                       
she is on her feet, arms akimbo. “and you won’t even share that.”                 
i shake my head.                                                                  
“it must be a lonely world you inhabit, magician, if even those who love          
you are barred from it.”                                                          
at that moment it seems she is simply trying her last trick for getting an        
answer from me. i screw my resolve yet tighter. “i didn’t say that.”              
“you didn’t have to. it is your silence that tells me, if you know the road       
to hell too, why not head that way? good-bye!”                                    
“julia. don’t…”                                                                   
she chooses not to hear me. still life with flowers…                              
awakening, night. autumn wind beyond my window. dreams. blood of                  
life without the body… swirling… i swung my feet out of bed and sat               
rubbing my eyes, my temples. it had been sunny and afternoon when i’d             
finished telling random my story, and he’d sent me to get some shuteye            
afterward. i was suffering from shadow lag and felt completely turned             
around at the moment, though i was not certain exactly what the hour might        
be.                                                                               
i stretched, got up, repaired myself and donned fresh clothing. i knew            
that i would not be able to get back to sleep; also, i was feeling hungry. i      
took a warm cloak with me as i departed my quarters. i felt like going out        
rather than raiding the larder. i was in the mood for some walking, and i         
hadn’t been outside the palace and into town in years, i guessed. i made my       
way downstairs, then cut through a few chambers and a big hall, connecting        
up at the rear with a corridor i could have followed all the way from the         
stair if i’d cared to, but then i’d have missed a couple of tapestries i’d        
wanted to say hello to: an idyllic sylvan scene, with a couple making out         
following a picnic lunch; and a hunting scene of dogs and men pursuing a          
magnificent stag, which looks as if it might yet have a chance of getting         
away, if it will dare a stupendous leap that lies ahead…                          
i passed through and made my way up the corridor to a postern, where a            
bored-looking guard named jordy suddenly strove to seem attentive when            
he heard me coming. i stopped to pass the time with him and learned that he       
didn’t get off duty till midnight, which was almost two hours away.               
“i’m heading down into town,” i said. “where’s a good place to eat this           
time of night?”                                                                   
“what’ve you got a taste for?”                                                    
“seafood,” i decided.                                                             
“well, fiddler’s green—about two thirds of the way down the main                  
concourse—is very good for seafood. it’s a fancy place…”                          
i shook my head. “i don’t want a fancy place,” i said.                            
“the net’s still supposed to be good—down near the corner of the                  
smiths and ironmongers street. it’s not real fancy.”                              
“but you wouldn’t go there yourself?”                                             
“used to,” he replied. “but a number of the nobles and big merchants              
discovered it recently. i’d feel kind of uncomfortable there these days. it’s     
gotten sort of clubby.”                                                           
“hell! i don’t want conversation or atmosphere. i just want some nice             
fresh fish. where would you go for the best?”                                     
“well, it’s a long walk. but if you go all the way down to the docks, at          
the back of the cove, it’s a little to the west… but maybe you shouldn’t. it’s    
kind of late, and that isn’t the best neighborhood after dark.”                   
“is that by any chance death alley?”                                              
“they do sometimes call it that, sir, as bodies are occasionally found            
there of a morning. maybe you’d better go to the net, seeing as you’re            
alone.”                                                                           
“gerard took me through that area once, during the day. i think i could           
find my way around it, all right. what’s the name of the place?”                  
“uh, bloody bill’s.”                                                              
“thanks. i’ll say hi to bill for you.”                                            
he shook his head. “can’t. it was renamed after the manner of his                 
demise. his cousin andy runs it now.”                                             
“oh. what was it called before?”                                                  
“bloody sam’s,” he said.                                                          
well, what the hell. i bade him a good night and set out walking. i took          
the path to the short stairway down the slope, which led to the walkway           
through a garden and over to a side gate, where another guard let me out. it      
was a cool night with the breezed smells of autumn burning down the world         
about me. i drew it into my lungs and sighed it out again as i headed for the     
main concourse, the distant, almost-forgotten, slow clopping sounds of            
hoofs on cobbles coming to me like something out of dream or memory.              
the night was moonless but filled with stars, and the concourse below             
banked by globes of phosphorescent liquid set atop high poles, long-tailed        
mountain moths darting about them.                                                
when i reached the avenue i strolled. a few closed carriages rolled by            
as i passed along the way. an old man walking a tiny green dragon on a            
chain leash touched his hat to me as i passed and said, “good evening.” he        
had seen the direction from which i had come, though i was sure he did not        
recognize me. my face is not that well-known about town. my spirits               
loosened a bit after a time, and i felt a spring come into my step.               
random had not been as angry as i’d thought he might. since                       
ghostwheel had not been stirring up any trouble, he had not charged me to         
go after it immediately and try again for a shutdown. he had merely told me       
to think about it and come up with the best course of action we might             
pursue. and flora had been in touch earlier and told him who luke was—a           
thing that seemed to have eased his mind somehow, knowing the identity of         
the enemy. though i’d asked, he would not tell me what plans he might             
have formulated for dealing with him. he did allude to the recent dispatch        
of an agent to kashfa, though, to obtain certain unspecified information.         
the thing that seemed to trouble him the most, actually, was the possibility      
that the outlaw dalt was still to be numbered among the living.                   
“something about that man…” random began.                                         
“what?” i’d asked.                                                                
“for one thing, i saw benedict run him through. that generally tends to           
terminate a person’s career.”                                                     
“tough son of a bitch,” i said. “or damn lucky. or both.”                         
“if he is the same man, he’s the son of the desacratrix. you’ve heard of          
her?”                                                                             
“deela,” i said. “wasn’t that her name? some sort of religious fanatic?           
militant?”                                                                        
random nodded. “she caused a lot of trouble out around the periphery              
of the golden circle—mostly near begma. you ever been there?”                     
“no.”                                                                             
“well, begma’s the nearest point on the circle to kashfa, which is what           
makes your story particularly interesting. she’d raided a lot in begma and        
they couldn’t handle her by themselves. they finally reminded us of the           
protection alliance we have with almost all the circle kingdoms—and dad           
decided to go in personally and teach her a lesson. she’d burned one              
unicorn shrine too many. he took a small force, defeated her troops, took         
her prisoner and hanged a bunch of her men. she escaped, though, and a            
couple of years later when she was all but forgotten she came back with a         
fresh force and started the same crap all over. begma screamed again, but         
dad was busy. he sent bleys in with a larger force. there were several            
inconclusive engagements—they were raiders, not a regular army—but                
bleys finally cornered them and wiped them out. she died that day, leading        
her troops.”                                                                      
“and dalt’s her son?”                                                             
“that’s the story, and it makes some sense, because he did everything             
he could to harass us for a long time. he was after revenge, pure and             
simple, for his mother’s death. finally, he put together a fairly impressive      
fighting force and tried to raid amber. got a lot farther than you’d think,       
right up to kolvir. but benedict was waiting, his pet regiment at his back.       
benedict cut them to pieces, and it sure looked as if he’d wounded dalt           
mortally. a few of his men were able to carry him off the field, so we never      
saw the body. but hell! who cared?”                                               
“and you think he could be the same guy who was luke’s friend when                
he was a kid—and later?”                                                          
“well, the age is about right and he seems to hail from that same general         
area. i suppose it’s possible.”                                                   
i mused as i strolled. jasra hadn’t really liked the guy, according to the        
hermit. so what was his part in things now? too many unknowns, i                  
decided. it would take knowledge rather than reasoning to answer that one.        
so let it ride and go enjoy dinner…                                               
i continued on down the concourse. near to its farther end i heard                
laughter and saw where some hardy drinkers still occupied a few tables at a       
sidewalk cafe. one of them was droppa, but he didn’t spot me and i passed         
on. i did not feel like being amused. i turned onto weavers street, which         
would take me over to where west vine wound its way up from the harbor            
district. a tall masked lady in a silver cloak hurried by and into a waiting      
carriage. she glanced back once and smiled beneath her domino. i was              
certain that i didn’t know her, and i found myself wishing i did. it was a        
pretty smile. then a gust of wind brought me the smoke-smell of someone’s         
fireplace and rattled a few dead leaves as it went by. i wondered where my        
father was.                                                                       
down along the street then and left on west vine… narrower here than              
the concourse, but still wide; a greater distance between lights, but still       
sufficiently illuminated for night travelers. a pair of horsemen clopped          
slowly by, singing a song i did not recognize. something large and dark           
passed overhead a bit later, to settle upon a roof across the street. a few       
scratching noises came from that direction, then silence. i followed a curve      
to the right, then another to the left, entering what i knew to be a long series  
of switchbacks. my way grew gradually steeper. a harbor breeze came up            
at some point a little later, bearing me my first salt sea smells of the          
evening. a short while afterward—two turns, i believe—and i had a view            
of the sea itself, far below; bobbing lights on a sparkling, swelling slickness   
over black, pent by the curving line of bright dots, harbor road. to the east     
the sky was powdered slightly. a hint of horizon appeared at the edge of the      
world. i thought i caught a glimpse of the distant light of cabra minutes         
later, then lost it again with another turning of the way.                        
a puddle of light like spilled milk pulsed on the street to my right,             
outlining a ghostly gridwork of cobbles at its farthest downhill reach; the       
stippled pole above it might advertise some spectral barbershop; the              
cracked globe at its top still showed a faint phosphorescence, skull-on-a-        
stick style, reminding me of a game we used to play as kids back in the           
courts. a few lighted footprints proceeded downhill away from it, faint,          
fainter, gone. i passed on, and across the distance i heard the cries of sea      
birds. autumn’s smells were submerged in ocean’s. the powdered light              
beyond my left shoulder rose higher about the water, drifted forward across       
the wrinkled face of the deep. soon…                                              
my appetite grew as i walked. ahead, i beheld another dark-cloaked                
stroller on the other side of the street, a slight glowing at the edges of the    
boots. i thought of the fish i would soon be eating and hurried, breasting the    
figure and passing. a cat in a doorway paused at licking her asshole to           
watch me go by, hind leg held vertical the while. another horseman passed,        
this one headed up the hill. i heard the fringes of an argument between a         
man and a woman from upstairs in one of the darkened buildings. another           
turning and the shoulder of the moon came into sight like some magnificent        
beast surfacing, shrugging droplets from bright bathic grottoes…                  
ten minutes later i had reached the port district and found my way over           
to harbor road, its lack of all but occasional globes supplemented by             
window spillage, a number of buckets of burning pitch and the glow of the         
now-risen moon. the smells of salt and sea-wrack were more intense here,          
the road more cluttered with trash, the passersby more colorfully garbed          
and noisier than any on the concourse, unless you counted droppa. i made          
my way to the rear of the cove, where the sounds of the sea came to me            
more strongly: the rushing, building advances of waves, then their crashing       
and splashing out beyond the breakwater; the gentler falls and slopping           
withdrawals nearer at hand; the creaking of ships, the rattling of chains, the    
bumping of some smaller vessel at pier or moor post. i wondered where the         
starburst, my old sailboat, might be now.                                         
i followed the curve of the road over to the western shore of the harbor.         
a pair of rats chased a black cat across my path as i wandered briefly,           
checking several side streets for the one i sought. the smells of barf as well    
as solid and liquid human waste mingled with other odors here, and i heard        
the cries, crashes and thuds of a struggle from somewhere nearby, leading         
me to believe that i was in the proper neighborhood. from somewhere               
distant a buoy bell rattled; from somewhere nearby i heard an almost bored-       
sounding string of curses preceding a pair of sailors who rounded the             
nearest corner to my right, reeling, staggered on past me, grinning, and          
broke into song moments later, receding. i advanced and checked the sign          
on that corner. seabreeze lane, it read.                                          
that was it, the stretch commonly called death alley. i turned there. it          
was just a street like any other. i didn’t see any corpses or even collapsed      
drunks for the first fifty paces, though a man in a doorway tried to sell me a    
dagger and a mustachioed stock character offered to fix me up with                
something young and tight. i declined both, and learned from the latter that      
i wasn’t all that far from bloody bill’s. i walked on. my occasional glances      
showed me three dark-cloaked figures far to the rear which, i supposed,           
could be following me; i had seen them back on harbor road too. also,             
they might not. in that i was not feeling particularly paranoid, i reflected      
that they could be anybody going anywhere and decided to ignore them.             
nothing happened. they kept to themselves, and when i finally located             
bloody bill’s and entered they passed on by, crossing the street and going        
into a small bistro a little farther down along the way.                          
i turned and regarded bill’s. the bar was to my right, tables to my left,         
suspicious-looking stains on the floor. a board on the wall suggested i give      
my order at the bar and say where i was sitting. the day’s catch was              
chalked beneath this.                                                             
so i went over and waited, collecting glances, until a heavy-set man              
with gray and amazingly shaggy brows came over and asked what i wanted.           
i told him the blue sea scut and pointed at an empty table to the rear. he        
nodded and shouted my order back through a hole in the wall, then asked           
me whether i wanted a bottle of bayle’s piss to go with it. i did, he got it for  
me, and a glass, uncorked it and passed it over. i paid up there, headed back     
to the table i had chosen and seated myself with my back to the wall.             
oil flames flickered through dirty chimneys in brackets all about the             
place. three men—two young, one middle-aged—played cards at the                   
corner table in the front and passed a bottle. an older man sat alone at the      
table to my left, eating. he had a nasty-looking scar running both above and      
below his left eye, and there was a long wicked blade about six inches out        
of its scabbard resting on the chair to his right. he, too, had his back to the   
wall. men with musical instruments rested at another table: between               
numbers, i guessed. i poured some of the yellow wine into my glass and            
took a sip: a distinctive taste i remembered from across the years. it was        
okay for quaffing. baron bayle owned a number of vineyards about thirty           
miles to the east. he was the official vintner to the court, and his red wines    
were generally excellent. he was less successful with the whites, though,         
and often wound up dumping a lot of second-rate stuff onto the local              
market. it bore his emblem and a picture of a dog—he liked dogs—so it             
was sometimes called dog piss and sometimes bayle’s piss, depending on            
who you talked to. dog lovers sometimes take offense at the former                
appellation.                                                                      
about the time my food arrived i noticed that two young men near the              
front of the bar were glancing in my direction more than occasionally,            
exchanging a few indistinguishable words and laughing and smiling a lot. i        
ignored them and turned my attention to my meal. a little later the scarred       
man at the next table said softly, without leaning or looking toward me, his      
lips barely moving, “free advice. i think those two guys at the bar noticed       
you’re not wearing a blade, and they’ve marked you for trouble.”                  
“thanks,” i said.                                                                 
well… i was not overly concerned about my ability to deal with them,              
but given a choice i’d rather avoid the occasion entirely. if all that it         
required was a visible blade, that was easily remedied.                           
a moment’s meditation and the logrus danced before me. shortly                    
thereafter, i was reaching through it in search of the proper weapon—             
neither too long nor too heavy, properly balanced, with a comfortable grip        
—with a wide dark belt and scabbard. it took me close to three minutes,           
partly because i was so fussy about it, i suppose—but hell, if prudence           
required one, i wanted comfort—and partly because it is harder reaching           
through shadow in the vicinity of amber than it is almost anywhere else.          
when it came into my hands i sighed and mopped my brow. then i                    
brought it up slowly from beneath the table, belt and all, drew it about half a   
foot from its scabbard, to follow a good example, and placed it on the seat       
to my right. the two guys at the bar caught the performance and i grinned         
back at them. they had a quick consultation, and this time they weren’t           
laughing. i poured myself a fresh glass of wine and drank it off at a single      
draught. then i returned to my fish, about which jordy had been right. the        
food here was very good.                                                          
“neat trick, that,” the man at the next table said. “i don’t suppose it’s an      
easy one to learn?”                                                               
“nope.”                                                                           
“it figures. most good things aren’t, or everybody’d do ’em. they may             
still go after you, though, seeing as you’re alone. depends on how much           
they drink and how reckless they get. you worried?”                               
“nope.”                                                                           
“didn’t think so. but they’ll hit someone tonight.”                               
“how can you tell?”                                                               
he looked at me for the first time and grinned a nasty grin. “they’re             
generic, like wind-up toys. see you around.”                                      
he tossed a coin onto the table, stood, buckled on his sword belt, picked         
up a dark, feathered hat and headed for the door.                                 
“take care.” i nodded.                                                            
“night.” as he passed out of the place the two guys began whispering              
again, this time glancing after him rather than at me. some decision              
reached, they rose and departed quickly. for a moment i was tempted to            
follow, but something restrained me. a little later, i heard the sounds of a      
scuffle from up the street. not too long after that, a figure appeared in the     
doorway, hovered a moment, then fell forward. it was one of the two               
drinkers. his throat had been cut.                                                
andy shook his head and dispatched his waiter to inform the local                 
constabulary. then he took hold of the body by the heels and dragged it           
outside, so as not to impede the flow of customers.                               
later, when i was ordering another fish, i asked andy about the                   
occurrence. he smiled grimly.                                                     
“it is not good to mess with an emissary of the crown,” he said. “they            
tend to pick them tough.”                                                         
“that guy who was sitting next to me works for random?”                           
he studied my face, then nodded. “old john worked for oberon, too.                
whenever he passes through he eats here.”                                         
“i wonder what sort of mission he was on?”                                        
he shrugged. “who knows? but he paid me in kashfan currency, and i                
know he ain’t from kashfa.”                                                       
as i worked on my second platter i pondered that one. whatever it was             
that random had wanted from kashfa was probably on its way to the castle          
right now, unless of course it was unavailable. it would almost have to           
concern luke and jasra. i wondered what it was, and of what benefit it            
might be.                                                                         
i sat there for a long while after that, thinking, and the place was a lot        
less noisy than it had been for most of an hour, even when the musicians          
began a fresh set. had it been john the guys had been watching all along,         
with both of us misinterpreting their gazes as directed toward me? or had         
they simply decided to go after the first person who left alone? i realized       
from these reflections that i was beginning to think like an amberite again       
—seeking plots everywhere—and i hadn’t been back all that long.                   
something in the atmosphere, i guessed. probably it was a good thing              
that my mind was moving along these lines once more, since i was involved         
in so much already and it seemed an investment in self-preservation.              
i finished my glass of wine and left the bottle on the table with a few           
drinks still in it. it occurred to me that i shouldn’t be fogging my senses any   
further, all things considered. i rose and buckled on my sword belt.              
as i passed the bar andy nodded. “if you run into anyone from the                 
palace,” he said softly, “you might mention that i didn’t know that was           
going to happen.”                                                                 
“you knew them?”                                                                  
“yeah. sailors. their ship came in a couple of days ago. they’ve been             
in trouble here before. blow their pay fast, then look for some more the          
quick way.”                                                                       
“do you think they might be professionals at—removing people?”                    
“because of john’s being what he is, you mean? no. they got caught                
once too often, mainly for being stupid. sooner or later they were bound to       
run into someone who knew what he was doing and end up this way. i don’t          
know anyone who’d hire them for something serious.”                               
“oh, he got the other one too?”                                                   
“yep. up the street a way. so you might mention that they just                    
happened to be in the wrong place at the wrong time.”                             
i stared at him and he winked.                                                    
“i saw you down here with gerard, several years ago. i make it a point            
never to forget a face that might be worth remembering.”                          
i nodded. “thanks. you serve a good meal.”                                        
outside, it was cooler than it had been earlier. the moon hung higher and         
the sea was noisier. the street was deserted in my immediate vicinity. loud       
music poured from one of the places back toward harbor street, with               
accompanying sounds of laughter. i glanced within as i passed it and saw          
where a tired-looking woman on a small stage appeared to be giving herself        
a gynecological examination. from somewhere nearby i heard a sound of             
breaking glass. a drunk reeled toward me from between two buildings, one          
hand outstretched. i walked on. the wind sighed amid masts in the harbor,         
and i found myself wishing luke were at my side—like in the old days,             
before things got complicated—someone of my own age and cast of mind              
to talk to. all my relatives here had too many centuries of cynicism or           
wisdom for us to see things and feel them in much the same way.                   
ten paces later, frakir pulsed wildly upon my wrist. in that there was no         
one anywhere near me at that moment, i did not even draw my new blade. i          
threw myself flat, then rolled toward the shadows to my right. simultaneous       
with this, i heard a thunk from the side of the building across the street. the   
first glance i could spare in that direction showed me an arrow protruding        
from a wall, its height and position such that had i not taken the dive it        
might well have hit me. its angle also indicated that i had just cast myself in   
the direction from which it had been discharged.                                  
i raised myself enough to draw my blade and looked to my right. there             
were no opened windows or doors in the immediately adjacent building, a           
darkened place, its front wall only about six feet away now. but there was a      
gap between it and the buildings on either side, and geometry told me that        
the arrow had come from the open area ahead of me.                                
i rolled again, bringing myself up beside the low, roofed porch which             
ran the full width of the place. i scrambled up onto it before i rose fully.      
staying near the wall i advanced, cursing the slowness silence demanded. i        
was almost near enough to the opening to be able to rush any archer who           
might step out, before he could release another arrow. the possibility of his     
circling and catching me from behind did pass through my mind, though,            
and i flattened myself against the wall, blade extended forward, and cast         
quick glances behind as i moved. frakir writhed into my left hand and hung        
ready.                                                                            
if i reached the corner and no one emerged i was uncertain what i                 
would do next. the situation seemed to demand a magical offensive. but            
unless the spells were already hung—and i’d been remiss in this—one can           
seldom spare the attention it requires in life-and-death situations. i halted. i  
controlled my breathing. i listened…                                              
he was being careful, but i heard faint sounds of movement from the               
roof, coming forward. but this did not preclude another, or even several,         
being around the corner. i had no idea how many persons might be involved         
in this ambush, though it was beginning to strike me as a little too              
sophisticated for a simple robbery. in such a case, i doubted there would be      
only one. and their forces might be split several ways. i held my position,       
my mind racing. when the attack came, it would be concerted, i was certain        
of that. i imagined an archer around the corner, arrow nocked, waiting for a      
signal. the one on the roof would most likely have a blade. i guessed at          
blades for any others, too…                                                       
i pushed aside any questions as to who might be after me and how they             
had located me here—if it were indeed me, personally, whom they were              
after. such considerations made no difference at this point. i would be just      
as dead were they random thugs seeking my purse as i would be if they             
were assassins, should they succeed in the present enterprise.                    
again. a sound from above. someone was directly overhead. any                     
moment now…                                                                       
with a shuffling noise and a great cry a man leaped from the roof to the          
street before me. his shout was apparently the signal to the archer, also, for    
there was immediate movement at the corner of the building, accompanied           
by the sounds of rapid footfalls from the building’s other corner, to my rear.    
before his feet even struck the ground i had cast frakir at the man from          
the roof with a command to kill. and i was rushing the archer before he had       
even rounded the corner completely, my blade already swinging. my cut             
passed through his bow, his arm and his lower abdomen. on the minus side,         
there was a man with a drawn blade right behind him and someone was               
running toward me along the porch.                                                
i placed my left foot upon the folding archer’s chest and propelled him           
backward into the man behind him. i used the recoiling momentum from              
the push to spin, my blade sweeping through a wide, wild arc which i had to       
adjust immediately to stop a head cut from the man who had crossed the            
porch. as i riposted to his chest and had my own cut parried i became             
peripherally aware of the one from the roof kneeling now in the street and        
tearing at his throat, in evidence that frakir was doing her job.                 
the man somewhere to my rear made my back feel very exposed. i had                
to do something fast or his blade would be in me within seconds. so…              
rather than riposting, i pretended to stumble, actually gathering my weight,      
positioning myself.                                                               
he lunged, cutting downward. i sprang to the side and thrust with a               
twisting movement of my body. if he were able to adjust the angle of that         
cut as i moved i would feel it in seconds. dangerous, but i couldn’t see any      
other choice.                                                                     
even as my blade entered his chest i did not know whether he had                  
connected with me. not that it mattered now. either he had or he hadn’t. i        
had to keep moving until i stopped or was stopped.                                
i used my blade like a lever, turning him as i continued my                       
counterclockwise movement, him at its center, hoping to position him              
between that fourth man and myself.                                               
the maneuver was partly successful. it was too late to interpose my               
skewered and sagging adversary fully, but in time at least to cause a small       
collision between him and the other. time enough, i hoped, as the other           
stumbled to the side, stepping down from the porch. all i needed do now           
was wrench my blade free, and it would be one-on-one.                             
i yanked at it…                                                                   
damn, damn, damn. the thing was wedged into bone and wouldn’t                     
come free. and the other man had regained his footing. i kept turning the         
body to keep it between us while with my left hand i tried to free my most        
recent adversary’s own blade from his still-clenched right fist.                  
ditto the damns. it was locked in a death grip, his lingers like metal            
cables about the haft.                                                            
the man in the street gave me a nasty smile while moving his blade                
about, looking for an opening. it was then that i caught the flash of the blue-   
stone ring he wore, answering my question as to whether it was me in              
particular who had been sought, here, tonight.                                    
i bent my knees as i moved and positioned my hands low upon the dead              
man’s body.                                                                       
situations such as this are, for me, sometimes videotaped into memory             
—a total absence of conscious thought and a great mass of instant                 
perceptions—timeless, yet only subject to serial review when the mind             
indulges in later replay.                                                         
there were cries from various places along the street, from within and            
without. i could hear people rushing in my direction. there was blood on          
the boards all around me, and i recall cautioning myself not to slip on it. i     
could see the archer and his bow, both of them broken, on the ground past         
the far edge of the porch. the garroted swordsman was sprawled in the             
street, off to the right of the man who menaced me now. the body i steered        
and positioned had become dead weight. to my small relief i saw that no           
more attackers had emerged from anywhere to join the final man i faced.           
and that man was sidestepping and feinting, getting ready to make his rush.       
okay. time.                                                                       
i propelled the corpse toward my attacker with all my strength and did            
not wait to observe the result of my action. the risk i was about to take         
granted me no time for such indulgence.                                           
i dove into the street and did a shoulder roll past the supine figure, who        
had dropped his blade in trying to use his hands against frakir. as i moved       
i heard the sound of some impact followed by a grunt from above and               
somewhere to the rear, indicating that i had been at least partly on target       
when i’d pushed the dead man toward the other. how effectively this would         
serve me still remained to be seen.                                               
my right hand snaked out as i went by, catching the hilt of the fallen            
man’s blade. i rolled to my feet, facing back in the direction from which i       
had come, extending the blade, crossing my legs and springing backward…           
barely in time. he was upon me with a strong series of attacks, and i             
backed away fast, parrying wildly. he was still smiling, but my first riposte     
slowed his advance and my second one stopped it.                                  
i settled and stood my ground. he was strong, but i could see that i was          
faster. there were people near at hand now, watching us. a few shouts of          
useless advice reached me. to which of us it was directed, i could not say. it    
didn’t matter, though. he stood for a few moments as i began to press my          
attack, and then he began to give ground, slowly, and i was sure that i could     
take him.                                                                         
i wanted him alive, though, which would make things a little more                 
difficult. that blue-stoned ring flashing and retreating before me held a         
mystery to which he had the answer, and i needed that answer. therefore, i        
had to keep pressing him, to wear him down…                                       
i tried turning him, a little at a time, as subtly as i could. i was hoping to    
press him into stumbling over the dead man to his rear. it almost worked,         
too.                                                                              
when his rear foot fell upon the arm of the sprawled man, he shifted his          
weight forward to maintain his balance. in one of those instants of               
inspiration on which one must act immediately without thinking, he turned         
this movement into a rush, seeing that my blade was out of line in                
preparation for the heavy rush i was about to give him as he stumbled.            
wrong of me to have anticipated that much, i guess.                               
he beat my blade cross-body with a heavy swing, throwing his own                  
weapon way out of line also and bringing us corps á corps, with him               
turning in the same direction i was facing and unfortunately providing him        
with the opportunity to drive his left fist into my right kidney with the full    
force of his momentum.                                                            
immediately, his left foot shot out to trip me, and the impact of the blow        
as we came together showed me that he was going to succeed. the best              
thing i could manage was to catch hold of my cloak with my left hand,             
spinning it out and dragging it back, entangling both our blades as we fell,      
while i tried hard to turn on the way down, so as to land on top of him. i did    
not succeed in falling upon him. we came down side by side, still facing          
each other, and the guard of someone’s blade—my own, i think—hit me               
hard in the ribs on my left side.                                                 
my right hand was caught beneath me and my left was still tangled in              
my cloak. his left was free, though, and high. he clawed at my face with it,      
and i bit his hand but couldn’t hold it. in the meantime, i finally managed to    
drag my own left hand free and i thrust it into his face. he turned his head      
away, tried to knee me and hit my hip, then thrust stiff fingers toward my        
eyes. i caught his wrist and held it. both of our right hands were still pinned   
and our weights seemed about equal. so all that i had to do was squeeze.          
the bones of his wrist crunched within my grip, and for the first time he         
cried out. then i simply pushed him away, rolled into a kneeling position         
and started to rise, dragging him up along with me. end of the game. i had        
won.                                                                              
he slumped suddenly against me. for a moment, i thought it a final                
trick, and then i saw the blade protruding from his back, the hand of the         
grim-faced man who had put it there already tightening to pull it out again.      
“you son of a bitch!” i cried in english—though i’m sure the meaning              
came through—and i dropped my burden and drove my fist into the                   
stranger’s face, knocking him over backward, his blade remaining in place.        
“i needed him!”                                                                   
i caught hold of my former adversary and raised him into the most                 
comfortable position i could manage.                                              
“who sent you?” i asked him. “how did you find me?”                               
he grinned weakly and dribbled blood. “no freebies here,” he said.                
“ask somebody else,” and he slumped forward and got blood on my                   
shirtfront.                                                                       
i drew the ring from his finger and added it to my collection of                  
goddamned blue stones. then i rose and glared at the man who had stabbed          
him. two other figures were helping him to his feet.                              
“just what the hell did you do that for?” i asked, advancing upon them.           
“i saved your damn life,” the man growled.                                        
“the hell you did! you might have just cost me it! i needed that man              
alive!”                                                                           
then the figure to his left spoke, and i recognized the voice. she placed         
her hand lightly upon the arm i did not even realize i had raised to strike the   
man again.                                                                        
“he did it on my orders,” she said. “i feared for your life, and i did not        
understand that you wanted him prisoner.”                                         
i stared at her pale proud features within the dark cloak’s raised cowl. it       
was vinta bayle, caine’s lady, whom i had last seen at the funeral. she was       
also the third daughter of the baron bayle, to whom amber owed many a             
bibulous night.                                                                   
i realized that i was shaking slightly. i drew a deep breath and caught           
control of myself.                                                                
“i see,” i said at last. “thank you.”                                             
“i am sorry,” she told me.                                                        
i shook my head. “you didn’t know. what’s done is done. i’m grateful              
to anybody who tries to help me.”                                                 
“i can still help you,” she said. “i might have misread this one, but i           
believe you may still be in danger. let’s get away from here.”                    
i nodded. “a moment, please.”                                                     
i went and retrieved frakir from about the neck of the other dead man.            
she disappeared quickly into my left sleeve. the blade i had been using fit       
my scabbard after a fashion, so i pushed it home and adjusted the belt,           
which had pulled around toward the rear.                                          
“let’s go,” i said to her.                                                        
the four of us strode back toward harbor street. interested bystanders            
got out of our way quickly. someone was probably already robbing the              
dead behind us. things fall apart; the center cannot hold. but what the hell,     
it’s home.                                                                        
                                                                     
chapter 5                                                                         
walking with the lady vinta and two serving-men of the house of bayle,            
my side still hurting from its encounter with a sword hilt, beneath a moon-       
bright, star-bright sky, through a sea mist, away from death alley. lucky,        
actually, that a bump on the side was all i acquired in my engagement with        
those who would do me harm. how they had located me so quickly upon               
my return, i could not say. but it seemed as if vinta might have some idea        
about this, and i was inclined to trust her, both because i knew her              
somewhat and because she had lost her man, my uncle caine, to my former           
friend luke, from whose party anything involving a blue stone seemed to           
have its origin.                                                                  
when we turned onto a seaward side way off harbor street, i asked her             
what she had in mind.                                                             
“i thought we were heading for vine,” i said.                                     
“you know you are in danger,” she stated.                                         
“i guess that’s sort of obvious.”                                                 
“i could take you to my father’s place up in town,” she said, “or we              
could escort you back to the palace, but someone knows you are here and it        
didn’t take long to reach you.”                                                   
“true.”                                                                           
“we have a boat moored down this way. we can sail along the coast and             
reach my father’s country place by morning. you will have disappeared.            
anyone seeking you in amber will be foiled.”                                      
“you don’t think i’d be safe back in the palace?”                                 
“perhaps,” she said. “but your whereabouts may be known locally.                  
come with me and this won’t be the case.”                                         
“i’ll be gone and random will learn from one of the guards that i was             
heading for death alley. this will cause considerable consternation and a         
huge brouhaha.”                                                                   
“you can reach him by trump tomorrow and tell him that you’re in the              
country—if you have your cards with you.”                                         
“true. how did you know where to find me this evening? you can’t                  
persuade me that we met by coincidence.”                                          
“no, we followed you. we were in the place across the way from                    
bill’s.”                                                                          
“you anticipated tonight’s happenings?”                                           
“i saw the possibility. if i’d known everything, of course i’d have               
prevented it.”                                                                    
“what’s going on? what do you know about all of this, and what’s your             
part in it?”                                                                      
she laughed, and i realized it was the first time i had ever heard her do         
it. it was not the cold, mocking thing i would have guessed at from caine’s       
lady.                                                                             
“i want to sail while the tide is high,” she said, “and you want a story          
that will take all night. which will it be, merlin? security or satisfaction?”    
“i’d like both, but i’ll take them in order.”                                     
“okay,” she said, then turned to the smaller of the two men, the one i            
had hit. “jarl, go home. in the morning, tell my father that i decided to go      
back to arbor house. tell him it was a nice night and i wanted to sail, so i      
took the boat. don’t mention merlin.”                                             
the man touched his cap to her. “very good, m’lady.” he turned and                
headed back along the way we had come.                                            
“come on,” she said to me then, and she and the big fellow—whose                  
name i later learned was drew—led me down among the piers to where a              
long sleek sailboat was tied up. “do much sailing?” she asked me.                 
“used to,” i said.                                                                
“good enough. you can give us a hand.”                                            
which i did. we didn’t talk much except for business while we were                
getting unbuttoned and rigged and casting off. drew steered and we worked         
the sails. later, we were able to take turns for long spells. the wind wasn’t     
tricky. in fact, it was just about perfect. we slid away, rounded the             
breakwater and made it out without any problems. having stowed our                
cloaks, i saw that she wore dark trousers and a heavy shirt. very practical,      
as if she’d planned for something like this ahead of time. the belt she           
stowed bore a real, full-length blade, not some jeweled dagger. and just          
from watching the way she moved, i’d a feeling she might be able to use           
the thing pretty well. also, she reminded me of someone i couldn’t quite          
place. it was more a matter of mannerisms of gesture and voice than it was        
of appearance. not that it mattered. i had more important things to think         
about as soon as we settled into routine and i had a few moments to stare         
across the dark waters and do some quick reviewing.                               
i was familiar with the general facts of her life, and i had encountered          
her a number of times at social gatherings. i knew she knew that i was            
corwin’s son and that i had been born and raised in the courts of chaos,          
being half of that bloodline which was linked anciently with amber’s own.         
in our conversation the last time we met, it became apparent that she was         
aware that i had been off in shadow for some years, going native and trying       
to pick up something of an education. presumably, uncle caine had not             
wanted her ignorant of family matters—which led me to wonder how                  
deeply their relationship might have run. i’d heard that they had been            
together for several years. so i wondered exactly how much she knew about         
me. i felt relatively safe with her, but i had to decide how much i was           
willing to tell her in exchange for the information she obviously possessed       
concerning those who were after me locally. this, because i had a feeling it      
would probably be a trade-off. other than doing a favor for a member of the       
family, which generally comes in handy, there was no special reason for her       
having an interest in me personally. her motivation in the whole matter           
pretty much had to be a desire for revenge, so far as i could see, for caine’s    
killing. with this in mind, i was willing to deal. it is always good to have an   
ally. but i had to decide how much i was willing to give her of the big           
picture. did i want her messing around in the entire complex of events that       
surrounded me? i doubted it, even as i wondered how much she would be             
asking. most likely she just wanted to be in on the kill, whatever that might     
be. when i glanced over to where moonlight accentuated the planes of her          
angular face, it was not difficult to superimpose a mask of nemesis upon          
those features.                                                                   
out from shore, riding the sea breeze east, passing the great rock of             
kolvir, the lights of amber like jewels in her hair, i was taken again by an      
earlier feeling of affection. though i had grown up in darkness and exotic        
lighting amid the non-euclidean paradoxes of the courts, where beauty was         
formed of more surreal elements, i felt more and more drawn to amber              
every time i visited her, until at last i realized she was a part of me, until i  
began to think of her, too, as home. i did not want luke storming her slopes      
with riflemen, or dalt performing commando raids in her vicinity. i knew          
that i would be willing to fight them to protect her.                             
back on the beach, near the place where caine had been laid to rest, i            
thought i saw a flash of prancing whiteness, moving slowly, then quickly,         
then vanishing within some cleft of the slope. i would have said it was a         
unicorn, but with the distance and the darkness and the quickness of it all, i    
could never be certain.                                                           
we picked up a perfect wind a little later, for which i was grateful. i was       
tired, despite my day-long slumber. my escape from the crystal cave, my           
encounter with the dweller, and the pursuit by the whirlwind and its              
masked master all flowed together in my mind as the nearly continuous             
action that they were. and now the postadrenal reaction from my latest            
activity was settling in. i wanted nothing more than to listen to the lapping     
of the waves while i watched the black and craggy shoreline slide by to port      
or turned to regard the flickering sea to starboard. i did not want to think, i   
did not want to move…                                                             
a pale hand upon my arm. “you’re tired,” i heard her say.                         
“i guess so,” i heard myself say.                                                 
“here’s your cloak. why don’t you put it on and rest? we’re holding               
steady. the two of us can manage easily now. we don’t need you.”                  
i nodded as i drew it about me. “i’ll take you up on that. thanks.”               
“are you hungry or thirsty?”                                                      
“no. i had a big meal back in town.”                                              
her hand remained on my arm. i looked up at her. she was smiling. it              
was the first time i had seen her smile. with the fingertips of her other hand    
she touched the bloodstain on my shirtfront.                                      
“don’t worry. i’ll take care of you,” she said.                                   
i smiled back at her because it seemed she wanted me to. she squeezed             
my shoulder and left me then, and i stared after her and wondered whether         
there were some element i had omitted from my earlier equation concerning         
her. but i was too tired now to solve for a new unknown. my thinking              
machinery was slowing, slowing…                                                   
back braced against the port gunwale, rocked gently by the swells, i let          
my head nod. through half-closed eyes i saw the dark blot she had                 
indicated upon my white shirtfront. blood. yes, blood…                            
“first blood!” despil had cried. “which is sufficient! have you                   
satisfaction?”                                                                    
“no!” jurt had shouted. “i barely scratched him!” and he spun on his              
stone and waved the triple claws of his trisp in my direction as he prepared      
to have at me again.                                                              
the blood oozed from the incision in my left forearm and formed itself            
into beads which rose into the air and drifted away from me like a handful        
of scattered rubies. i raised my fandon into a high guard position and            
lowered my mass, which i held far out to the right and angled forward. i          
bent my left knee and rotated my stone 90 degrees on our mutual axis. jurt        
corrected his own position immediately and dropped a half-dozen feet. i           
turned another 90 degrees, so that each of us seemed to be hanging upside         
down in relation to the other.                                                    
“bastard son of amber!” he cried, and the triple lances of light raked            
toward me from his weapon, to be shattered into bright, mothlike fragments        
by the sweep of my fandon, to fall, swirling, downward into the abyss of          
chaos above which we rode.                                                        
“up yours,” i replied, and squeezed the haft of my trisp, triggering the          
pulsed beams from its three hair-fine blades. i extended my arm above my          
head as i did so, slashing at his shins.                                          
he swept the beams away with his fandon, at almost the full extent of             
their eight-foot effective range. there is about a three-second recharge          
pause on a trisliver, but i feinted a dead cut toward his face, before which he   
raised fand reflexively, and i triggered the trisp for a swirl cut at his knees.  
he broke the one-second pulse in low fand, triggered a thrust at my face          
and spun over backward through a full 360, counting on the recharge time          
to save his back and coming up, fandon high, to cut at my shoulder.               
but i was gone, circling him, dropping and rotating erect. i cut at his           
own exposed shoulder but was out of range. despil, on his beachball-sized         
stone, was circling also, far to my right, while my own second-fandon high        
above, was dropping quickly. we clung to our small stones with                    
shapeshifted feet, there on an outer current of chaos, drifting, as at the        
whirlpool’s rim. jurt rotated to follow me, keeping his left forearm—to           
which the fandon is attached, elbow and wrist—horizontal, and executing a         
slow circular movement with it. its three-foot length of filmy mesh, mord-        
weighted at the bottom, glittered in the balefire glow, which occurred at         
random intervals from many directions. he held his trisp in middle attack         
position, and he showed his teeth but was not smiling as i moved and he           
moved at opposite ends of the diameter of a ten-foot circle which we              
described over and over, looking for an opening.                                  
i tilted the plane of my orbit and he adjusted his own immediately to             
keep me company. i did it again, and so did he. then i did the dive—90            
degrees forward, fandon raised and extended—and i turned my wrist and             
dropped my elbow, angling my raking cut upward beneath his guard.                 
he cursed and cut, but i scattered his light, and three dark lines                
appeared upon his left thigh. the trisliver only cuts to a depth of about three   
quarters of an inch through flesh, which is why the throat, eyes, temples,        
inner wrists and femoral arteries are particularly favored targets in a serious   
encounter. still, enough cuts anywhere and you eventually wave goodbye to         
your opponent as he spins downward in a swarm of red bubbles into that            
place from whence no traveler returns.                                            
“blood!” mandor cried, as the beads formed upon jurt’s leg and drifted.           
“is there satisfaction, gentlemen?”                                               
“i’m satisfied,” i answered.                                                      
“i’m not!” jurt replied, turning to face me as i drifted to his left and          
rotated to my right. “ask me again after i’ve cut his throat!”                    
jurt had hated me from sometime before he had learned to walk, for                
reasons entirely his own. while i did not hate jurt, liking him was totally       
beyond my ability. i had always gotten along reasonably well with despil,         
though he tended to take jurt’s side more often than my own. but that was         
understandable. they were full brothers, and jurt was the baby.                   
jurt’s trisp flashed and i broke the light and riposted. he scattered my          
beams and spun off to the side. i followed. our trisps flared simultaneously,     
and the air between us was filled with flakes of brilliance as both attacks       
were shattered. i struck again, this time low, as soon as i had recharge. his     
came in high, and again both attacks died in fand. we drifted nearer.             
“jurt,” i said, “if either of us kills the other, the survivor will be outcast.   
call it off.”                                                                     
“it will be worth it,” he said. “don’t you think i’ve thought about it?”          
then he slashed an attack at my face. i raised both arms reflexively, fandon      
and trisp, and triggered an attack as shattered light showered before me. i       
heard him scream.                                                                 
when i lowered my fandon to eye level i saw that he was bent forward,             
and his trisp was drifting away. so was his left ear, trailing a red filament     
that quickly beaded itself and broke apart. a flap of scalp had also come         
loose, and he was trying to press it back into place.                             
mandor and despil were already spiraling in.                                      
“we declare the duel ended!” they were shouting, and i twisted the head           
of my trisp into a safety-lock position.                                          
“how bad is it?” despil asked me.                                                 
“i don’t know.”                                                                   
jurt let him close enough to check, and a little later despil said, “he’ll        
be all right. but mother is going to be mad.”                                     
i nodded. “it was his idea,” i said.                                              
“i know. come on. let’s get out of here.”                                         
he helped jurt steer toward an outcropping of the rim, fandon trailing            
like a broken wing. i lingered behind. sawall’s son mandor, my stepbrother,       
put his hand on my shoulder.                                                      
“you didn’t even mean him that much,” he said. “i know.”                          
i nodded and bit my lip. despil had been right about the lady dara, our           
mother, though. she favored jurt, and somehow he’d have her believing this        
whole thing was my fault. i sometimes felt she liked both of her sons by          
sawall, the old rim duke she’d finally married after giving up on dad,            
better than me. i’d once overheard it said that i reminded her of my father,      
whom i’d been told i resembled more than a little. i wondered again about         
amber and about other places, out in shadow, and felt my customary                
twinge of fear as this recalled to me the writhing logrus, which i knew to        
be my ticket to other lands. i knew that i was going to try it sooner than i      
had originally intended.                                                          
“let’s go see suhuy,” i said to mandor, as we rose up out of the abyss            
together. “there are more things i want to ask him.”                              
when i finally went off to college i did not spend a lot of time writing          
home.                                                                             
“…home,” vinta was saying, “pretty soon now. have a drink of water,” and          
she passed me a flask.                                                            
i took several long swallows and handed it back. “thanks.”                        
i stretched my cramped muscles and breathed the cold sea air. i looked            
for the moon and it was way back behind my shoulder.                              
“you were really out,” she said.                                                  
“do i talk in my sleep?”                                                          
“no.”                                                                             
“good.”                                                                           
“bad dreams?”                                                                     
i shrugged. “could be worse.”                                                     
“maybe you made a little noise, right before i woke you.”                         
“oh.”                                                                             
far ahead i saw a small light at the end of a dark promontory. she                
gestured toward it.                                                               
“when we’ve passed the point,” she said, “we will come into sight of              
the harbor at baylesport. we’ll find breakfast there, and horses.”                
“how far is it from arbor house?”                                                 
“about a league,” she replied. “an easy ride.”                                    
she stayed by me in silence for a while, watching the coastline and the           
sea. it was the first time we had simply sat together, my hands unoccupied        
and my mind free. and my sorcerer’s sense was stirred in that interval. i felt    
as if i were in the presence of magic. not some simple spell or the aura of       
some charmed object she might be bearing, but something very subtle. i            
summoned my vision and turned it upon her. there was nothing                      
immediately obvious, but prudence suggested i check further. i extended           
my inquiry through the logrus…                                                    
“please don’t do that,” she said.                                                 
i had just committed a faux pas. it is generally considered somewhat              
gauche to probe a fellow practitioner in such a fashion.                          
“i’m sorry,” i said. “i didn’t realize you were a student of the art.”            
“i am not,” she answered, “but i am sensitive to its operations.”                 
“in that case, you would probably make a good one.”                               
“my interests lie elsewhere,” she said.                                           
“i thought perhaps someone had laid a spell upon you,” i stated. “i was           
only trying to—”                                                                  
“whatever you saw,” she said, “belongs. let it be.”                               
“as you would. sorry.”                                                            
she must have known i couldn’t let it rest at that, though, when                  
unknown magic represents possible danger. so she went on, “it is nothing          
that can do you harm, i assure you. quite the contrary.”                          
i waited, but she did not have anything further to say on the matter. so i        
had to let it drop, for the moment. i shifted my gaze back to the lighthouse.     
what was i getting into with her, anyhow? how had she even known that i           
was back in town, let alone that i would visit death alley when i did? she        
must have known that the question would occur to me, and if there was to          
be good faith on both our parts she should be willing to explain it.              
i turned back toward her, and she was smiling again.                              
“the wind changes in the lee of the light,” she said, and she rose.               
“excuse me. i’ve work to do.”                                                     
“may i give you a hand?”                                                          
“in a bit. i’ll call you when i need you.”                                        
i watched her move away, and as i did i had the eerie feeling that she            
was watching me also, no matter where she was looking. i realized, too, that      
this feeling had been with me for some time, like the sea.                        
by the time we had docked and put everything in order and headed up a             
hill along a wide cobbled way toward an inn with smoke snaking from its           
chimney, the sky was growing pale in the east. after a hearty breakfast,          
morning’s light lay full upon the world. we walked then to a livery stable        
where three quiet mounts were obtained for the ride to her father’s estate.       
it was one of those clear crisp autumn days which become rarer and dearer         
as the year winds down. i finally felt somewhat rested, and the inn had had       
coffee—which is not that common in amber, outside the palace—and i                
enjoy my morning cup. it was good to move through the countryside at a            
leisurely pace and to smell the land, to watch the moisture fade from             
sparkling fields and turning leaves, to feel the wind, to hear and watch a        
flock of birds southbound for the isles of the sun. we rode in silence, and       
nothing happened to break my mood. memories of sorrow, betrayal,                  
suffering and violence are strong but they do fade, whereas interludes such       
as this, when i close my eyes and regard the calendar of my days, somehow         
outlast them, as i see myself riding with vinta bayle under morning skies         
where the houses and fences are stone and stray seabirds call, there in the       
wine country to the east of amber, and the scythe of time has no power in         
this corner of the heart.                                                         
when we arrived at arbor house we gave the horses into the care of                
bayle’s grooms, who would see to their eventual return to town. drew              
departed for his own quarters then, and i walked with vinta to the huge           
hilltop manor house. it commanded far views of rocky valleys and hillsides        
where the grapes were grown. a great number of dogs approached and tried          
to be friendly as we made our way to the house, and once we had entered           
their voices still reached us on occasion. wood and wrought iron, gray            
flagged floors, high beamed ceilings, clerestory windows, family portraits, a     
couple of small tapestries of salmon, brown, ivory and blue, a collection of      
old weapons showing a few touches of oxidation, soot smudges on the gray          
stone about the hearth… we passed through the big front hall and up a stair.      
“take this room,” she said, opening a darkwood door, and i nodded as i            
entered and looked about. it was spacious, with big windows looking out           
over the valley to the south. most of the servants were at the baron’s place      
in town for the season. “there is a bath in the next room,” she told me,          
indicating a door to my left.                                                     
“great. thanks. just what i need.”                                                
“so repair yourself as you would.” she crossed to the window and                  
looked downward. “i’ll meet you on that terrace in about an hour, if that is      
agreeable.”                                                                       
i went over and looked down upon a large flagged area, well-shaded by             
ancient trees—their leaves now yellow, red and brown, many of them                
dotting the patio—the place bordered by flower beds, vacant now, a number         
of tables and chairs arranged upon it, a collection of potted shrubs well         
disposed among them.                                                              
“fine.”                                                                           
she turned toward me. “is there anything special you would like?”                 
“if there is any coffee about, i wouldn’t mind another cup or two when i          
meet you out there.”                                                              
“i’ll see what i can do.”                                                         
she smiled and seemed to sway slightly toward me for a moment. it                 
almost seemed in that instant as if she wanted me to embrace her. but if she      
did not, it could be slightly awkward. and under the circumstances i              
wanted no familiarity with her anyway, having no idea as to the sort of           
game she was playing. so i returned her smile, reached out and squeezed           
her arm, said, “thank you,” and stepped away. “i guess i’ll see about that        
bath now.”                                                                        
i saw her to the door and let her out.                                            
it was good to get my boots off. it was far better to soak, for a long,           
warm time.                                                                        
later, in fresh-conjured attire, i made my way downstairs and located a           
side door that let of the kitchen onto the patio. vinta, also scrubbed and        
refitted, in brown riding pants and a loose tan blouse, sat beside a table at     
the east end of the patio. two places were set upon it, and i saw a coffeepot     
and a tray of fruit and cheeses. i crossed over, leaves crunching beneath my      
feet, and sat down.                                                               
“did you find everything to your satisfaction?” she asked me.                     
“entirely,” i replied.                                                            
“and you’ve notified amber of your whereabouts?”                                  
i nodded. random had been a bit irritated at my taking off without                
letting him know, but then he had never told me not to. he was less               
irritated, however, when he learned that i hadn’t gone all that far, and he       
even acknowledged finally that perhaps i had done a prudent thing in              
disappearing following such a peculiar attack. “keep your eyes open and           
keep me posted,” were his final words.                                            
“good. coffee?”                                                                   
“please.”                                                                         
she poured and gestured toward the tray. i took an apple and took a bite.         
“things have begun happening,” she said ambiguously, as she filled her            
own cup.                                                                          
“i can’t deny it,” i acknowledged.                                                
“and your troubles have been manifold.”                                           
“true.”                                                                           
she took a sip of coffee. “would you care to tell me about them?” she             
finally said.                                                                     
“they’re a little too manifold,” i replied. “you said something last night        
about your story being a long one, too.”                                          
she smiled faintly. “you must feel you have no reason to trust me more            
than necessary at this point,” she said. “i can see that. why trust anyone you    
don’t have to when something dangerous is afoot, something you do not             
completely understand? right?”                                                    
“it does strike me as a sound policy.”                                            
“yet i assure you that your welfare is of the highest concern to me.”             
“do you think i may represent a means of getting at caine’s killer?”              
“yes,” she said, “and insofar as they may become your killers i would             
like to get at them.”                                                             
“are you trying to tell me that revenge is not your main objective?”              
“that’s right. i would rather protect the living than avenge the dead.”           
“but that part becomes academic if it’s the same individual in both               
cases. do you think it is?”                                                       
“i am not certain,” she said, “that it was luke who sent those men after          
you last night.”                                                                  
i placed my apple beside my cup and took a long drink of coffee.                  
“luke?” i said. “luke who? what do you know of any luke?”                         
“lucas raynard,” she said steadily, “who trained a band of mercenaries            
in the pecos wilderness in northern new mexico, issued them supplies of a         
special ammunition that will detonate in amber, and sent them all home            
with it to await his orders to muster and be transported here—to attempt          
something your father once tried years ago.”                                      
“holy shit!” i said.                                                              
that would explain a lot—like luke’s showing up in fatigues back at               
the hilton in santa fe, with his story about liking to hike around in the         
pecos, with that round of peculiar ammunition i’d found in his pocket; and        
all the other trips he’d been making there—more, actually, than seemed            
absolutely necessary on his sales route… that angle had never occurred to         
me, but it made a lot of sense in light of everything i’d since teamed.           
“okay,” i acknowledged, “i guess you know luke raynard. mind                      
telling me how you came by this?”                                                 
“yes.”                                                                            
“yes?                                                                             
“yes, i mind. i’m afraid i’m going to have to play this game your way             
and trade you information a piece at a time. now that i think of it, it will      
probably make me feel more comfortable too. how does that sound to                
you?”                                                                             
“either one of us can call it quits at any time?”                                 
“which stops the trading, unless we can negotiate it.”                            
“all right.”                                                                      
“so you owe me one. you just returned to amber the other day. where               
had you been?”                                                                    
i sighed and took another bite of the apple. “you’re fishing,” i said             
finally. “that’s a big question. i’ve been to a lot of places. it all depends on  
how far back you want to go.”                                                     
“let’s take it from meg devlin’s apartment to yesterday,” she said.               
i choked on a piece of apple. “okay, you’ve made the point—you have               
some damn good sources of information,” i observed. “but it has to be             
fiona for that one. you’re in league with her some way, aren’t you?”              
“it’s not your turn for a question,” she said. “you haven’t answered              
mine yet.”                                                                        
“okay, fi and i came back to amber after i left meg’s place. the next             
day random sent me on a mission, to turn off a machine i’d built called           
ghostwheel. i failed in this but i ran into luke along the way. he actually       
helped me out of a tight spot. then, following a misunderstanding with my         
creation, i used a strange trump to take both luke and myself to safety.          
luke subsequently imprisoned me in a crystal cave—”                               
“aha!” she said.                                                                  
“i should stop there?”                                                            
“no, go on.”                                                                      
“i was a prisoner for a month or so, though it amounted to only a few             
days, amber time. i was released by a couple of fellows working for a lady        
named jasra, had an altercation with them and with the lady herself and           
trumped out to san francisco, to flora’s place. there, i revisited an             
apartment where a murder had occurred—”                                           
“julia’s place?”                                                                  
“yes. in it, i discovered a magical gateway which i was able to force             
open. i passed through it to a place called the keep of the four worlds. a        
battle was in progress there, the attackers probably being led by a fellow        
named dalt, of some small notoriety hereabouts at one time. later, i was          
pursued by a magical whirlwind and called names by a masked wizard. i             
trumped out and came home—yesterday.”                                             
“and that’s everything?”                                                          
“in capsule form, yes.”                                                           
“are you leaving out anything?”                                                   
“sure. for instance, there was a dweller on the threshold of the                  
gateway, but i was able to get by.”                                               
“no, that’s part of the package. anything else?”                                  
“mm. yes, there were two peculiar communications, ending in flowers.”             
“tell me about them.”                                                             
so i did.                                                                         
she shook her head when i’d finished. “you’ve got me there,” she said.            
i finished my coffee and the apple. she refilled my cup.                          
“now it’s my turn,” i said. “what did you mean by that ‘aha!’ when i              
mentioned the crystal cave?”                                                      
“it was blue crystal, wasn’t it? and it blocked your powers.”                     
“how’d you know?”                                                                 
“it was the color of the stone in the ring you took from that man last            
night.”                                                                           
“yes.”                                                                            
she got to her feet and moved around the table, stood a moment, then              
pointed to the vicinity of my left hip.                                           
“would you empty that pocket onto the table, please?”                             
i smiled. “sure. how’d you know?”                                                 
she didn’t answer that one, but then it was a different question. i               
removed the assortment of blue stones from my pocket—the chips from the           
cave, the carved button i’d snatched, the ring—and placed them upon the           
table.                                                                            
she picked up the button, studied it, then nodded.                                
“yes, that’s one also,” she stated.                                               
“one what?”                                                                       
she ignored the query and dipped her right forefinger into a bit of               
spilled coffee within her saucer. she then used it to trace three circles         
around the massed stones, widdershins. then she nodded again and                  
returned to her seat. i’d summoned the vision in time to see her build a cage     
of force about them. now, as i continued to watch, it seemed as if they were      
exhaling faint wisps of blue smoke that remained within the circle.               
“i thought you said you weren’t a sorcerer.”                                      
“i’m not,” she replied.                                                           
“i’ll save the question. but continue answering the last one. what is the         
significance of the blue stones?”                                                 
“they have an affinity for the cave, and for each other,” she told me. “a         
person with very little training could hold one of them and simply begin          
walking, following the slight psychic tugging. it would eventually lead him       
to the cave.”                                                                     
“through shadow, you mean?”                                                       
“yes.”                                                                            
“intriguing, but i fail to see any great value to it.”                            
“but that is not all. ignore the pull of the cave, and you will become            
aware of secondary tuggings. learn to distinguish the signature of the            
proper stone, and you can follow its bearer anywhere.”                            
“that does sound a little more useful. do you think that’s how those              
guys found me last night, because i had a pocket full of the things?”             
“probably, from a practical standpoint, they helped. actually, though, in         
your case, they should not even have been necessary at this point.”               
“why not?”                                                                        
“they have an additional effect. anyone who has one in his possession             
for a time becomes attuned to the thing. throw it away and the attunement         
remains. you can still be tracked then, just as if you had retained the stone.    
you would possess a signature of your own.”                                       
“you mean that even now, without them, i’m marked?”                               
“yes.”                                                                            
“how long does it take to wear off?”                                              
“i am not certain that it ever does.”                                             
“there must be some means of deattunement.”                                       
“i do not know for certain, but i can think of a couple of things that            
would probably do it.”                                                            
“name them.”                                                                      
“walking the pattern of amber or negotiating the logrus of chaos.                 
they seem almost to break a person apart and do a reassemblement into a           
purer form. they have been known to purge many strange conditions. as i           
recall, it was the pattern that restored your father’s memory.”                   
“yes—and i won’t even ask you how you know about the logrus—you                   
may well be right. as with so much else in life, it seems enough of a pain in     
the ass to be good for me. so, you think they could be zeroing in on me           
right now, with or without the stones?”                                           
“yes.”                                                                            
“how do you know all this?” i asked.                                              
“i can sense it—and that’s an extra question. but i’ll give you a free one        
in the interests of expedition.”                                                  
“thanks. i guess it’s your turn now.”                                             
“julia was seeing an occultist named victor melman before she died.               
do you know why?”                                                                 
“she was studying with him, looking for some sort of development—at               
least, that’s what i was told by a guy who knew her at the time. this was         
after we broke up.”                                                               
“that is not exactly what i meant,” she said. “do you know why she                
desired this development?”                                                        
“sounds like an extra question to me, but maybe i owe you one. the                
fellow i’d spoken with told me that i had scared her, that i’d given her to       
believe that i possessed unusual abilities, and that she was looking for some     
of her own in self-defense.”                                                      
“finish it,” she said.                                                            
“what do you mean?”                                                               
“that’s not a complete answer. did you actually give her cause to                 
believe that and to be afraid of you?”                                            
“well, i guess i did. now my question: how could you possibly know                
anything about julia in the first place?”                                         
“i was there,” she answered. “i knew her.”                                        
“go ahead.”                                                                       
“that’s it. now it’s my turn.”                                                    
“that’s hardly complete.”                                                         
“but it’s all you’re getting on that one. take it or leave it.”                   
“according to our agreement i can call it quits over that.”                       
“true. will you?”                                                                 
“what do you want to know next?”                                                  
“did julia develop the abilities she sought?”                                     
“i told you that we’d stopped seeing each other before she got involved           
in that sort of thing. so i have no way of knowing.”                              
“you located the portal in her apartment from which the beast that slew           
her had presumably emerged. two questions now—not for you to answer               
for me, just for you to think over: why would anyone want her dead in the         
first place? and does it not seem a very peculiar way to have gone about it?      
i can think of a lot simpler ways of disposing of a person.”                      
“you’re right,” i agreed. “a weapon is a hell of a lot easier to manage           
than magic any day. as for why, i can only speculate. i had assumed it was        
a trap for me, and that she had been sacrificed as part of the package—my         
annual april thirtieth present. do you know about them, too?”                     
“let’s save that business for later. you are obviously aware that                 
sorcerers have styles, the same as painters, writers, musicians. when you         
succeeded in locating that gateway in julia’s apartment, was there anything       
about it which we might refer to as the author’s signature?”                      
“nothing special that i can recall. of course, i was in a hurry to force it.      
i wasn’t there to admire the aesthetics of the thing. but no, i can’t associate   
it with anyone with whose work i am familiar. what are you getting at?”           
“i just wondered whether it were possible that she might have                     
developed some abilities of her own along these lines, and in the course of       
things opened that gateway herself and suffered those consequences.”              
“preposterous!”                                                                   
“all right. i am just trying to turn up some reasons. i take it then that         
you never saw any indication that she might possess latent abilities for          
sorcery?”                                                                         
“no, i can’t recall any instances.”                                               
i finished my coffee, poured a refill.                                            
“if you don’t think luke is after me now, why not?” i asked her then.             
“he set up some apparent accidents for you, years ago.”                           
“yes. he admitted that recently. he also told me that he quit doing it            
after the first few times.”                                                       
“that is correct.”                                                                
“you know, it’s maddening—not knowing what you know and what you                  
do not.”                                                                          
“that is why we’re talking, isn’t it? it was your idea to go about it this        
way.”                                                                             
“it was not! you suggested this trade-off!”                                       
“this morning, yes. but the idea was originally yours, some time ago. i           
am thinking of a certain telephone conversation, at mr. roth’s place—”            
“you? that disguised voice on the phone? how could that be?”                      
“would you rather hear about that or about luke?”                                 
“that! no, luke! both, damn it!”                                                  
“so it would seem there is a certain wisdom in keeping to the format              
we’ve agreed upon. there is much to be said for orderliness.”                     
“okay, you’ve made another point. go on about luke.”                              
“it seemed to me, as an observer, that he quit that business as soon as he        
got to know you better.”                                                          
“you mean back about the time we became friendly—that wasn’t just an              
act?”                                                                             
“i couldn’t tell for sure then—and he certainly countenanced the years            
of attacks on you—but i believe that he actually sabotaged some of them.”         
“who was behind them after he quit?”                                              
“a red-haired lady with whom he seemed to be associated.”                         
“jasra?”                                                                          
“yes, that was her name—and i still don’t know as much about her as               
i’d like to. do you have anything there?”                                         
“i think i’ll save that for a big one,” i said.                                   
for the first time, she directed a narrow-eyed, teeth-clenched expression         
toward me.                                                                        
“can’t you see that i’m trying to help you, merlin?”                              
“really, what i see is that you want information i have,” i said, “and            
that’s okay. i’m willing to deal because you seem to know things i want,          
too. but i’ve got to admit that your reasons are murky to me. how the hell        
did you get to berkeley? what were you doing calling me at bill’s place?          
what is this power of yours you say isn’t sorcery? how—”                          
“that’s three questions,” she said, “and the beginning of a fourth.               
would you prefer to write them all out, and have me do the same for you?          
then we can both go off to our rooms and decide which ones we want to             
answer?”                                                                          
“no,” i replied. “i’m willing to play the game. but you are aware of my           
reason for wanting to know these things. it’s a matter of self-preservation to    
me. i thought at first that you wanted information that would help you to         
nail the man who killed caine. but you said no, and you didn’t give me            
anything to put in its place.”                                                    
“i did, too! i want to protect you!”                                              
“i appreciate the sentiment. but why? when it comes down to it, you               
hardly know me.”                                                                  
“nevertheless, that is my reason and i don’t feel like going behind it.           
take it or leave it.”                                                             
i got to my feet and began pacing the patio. i didn’t like the thought of         
giving away information that could be vital to my security, and ultimately        
that of amber—though i had to admit i was getting a pretty good return for        
what i’d given. her stuff did sound right. for that matter, the bayles had a      
long history of loyalty to the crown, for whatever that was worth. the thing      
that bothered me the most, i decided, was her insistence that it was not          
actually revenge that she was after. apart from this being a very un-             
amberlike attitude, if she were any judge at all as to what would go over         
with me she need but have agreed that blood was what she wanted, in order         
to make her concern intelligible. i would have bought it without looking          
any further. and what did she offer in its place? airy nothings and               
classified motives…                                                               
which could well mean she was telling the truth. disdaining the use of            
a workable lie and offering something more cumbersome in its place would          
seem the mark of genuine honesty. and she did, apparently, have more              
answers that i wanted.                                                            
i heard a small rattling sound from the table. i thought at first that she        
might be drumming on it with her fingertips as a sign of her irritation with      
me. but when i glanced back i saw that she was sitting perfectly still, not       
even looking at me.                                                               
i drew nearer, seeking the source. the ring, the pieces of blue stone and         
even the button were jiggling about on the tabletop, as of their own accord.      
“something you’re doing?” i asked.                                                
“no,” she replied.                                                                
the stone in the ring cracked and fell out of its setting.                        
“what, then?”                                                                     
“i broke a link,” she said. “i believe something may be trying to                 
reestablish it and failing.”                                                      
“even so, if i’m still attuned they don’t need them in order to locate me,        
do they?”                                                                         
“there may be more than one party involved,” she observed. “i think i             
should have a servant ride back to town and throw the things into the ocean.      
if someone wishes to follow them there, fine.”                                    
“the chips should just lead back to the cave, and the ring to the dead            
man,” i said. “but i’m not ready to throw the button away.”                       
“why not? it represents a big unknown.”                                           
“exactly. but these things would have to work both ways, wouldn’t                 
they? that would mean that i could learn to use the button to find my way         
to the flower thrower.”                                                           
“that could be dangerous.”                                                        
“and not doing it could prove more dangerous in the long run. no, you             
can throw the rest of them into the sea, but not the button.”                     
“all right. i’ll keep it pent for you.”                                           
“thanks. jasra is luke’s mother.”                                                 
“you’re joking!”                                                                  
“nope.”                                                                           
“that explains why he didn’t lean on her directly about the later april           
thirtieths. fascinating! it opens up a whole new lane of speculation.”            
“care to share them?”                                                             
“later, later. in the meantime, i’ll take care of these stones right now.”        
she scooped them all out of the circle and they seemed, for a moment, to          
dance in her hand. she stood.                                                     
“uh—the button?” i said.                                                          
“yes.”                                                                            
she put the button into her pocket and kept the others in her hand.               
“you’re going to get attuned yourself if you keep the button that way,            
aren’t you?”                                                                      
“no,” she said, “i won’t.”                                                        
“why not?”                                                                        
“there’s a reason. excuse me while i find a container for the others, and         
someone to transport them.”                                                       
“won’t that person get attuned?”                                                  
“it takes a while.”                                                               
“oh.”                                                                             
“have some more coffee—or something.”                                             
she turned and left. i ate a piece of cheese. i tried to figure out whether       
i’d gotten more answers or more new questions during the course of our            
conversation. i tried to ht some of the new pieces into the old puzzle.           
“father?”                                                                         
i turned, to see who had spoken. there was no one in sight.                       
“down here.”                                                                      
a coin-sized disk of light lay within a nearby flower bed, otherwise              
empty save for a few dry stalks and leaves. the light caught my attention         
when it moved slightly.                                                           
“ghost?” i asked.                                                                 
“uh-huh,” came the reply from among the leaves. “i was waiting to                 
catch you when you were alone. i’m not sure i trust that woman.”                  
“why not?”                                                                        
“she doesn’t scan right, like other people. i don’t know what it is. but          
that’s not what i wanted to talk to you about.”                                   
“what, then?”                                                                     
“uh—well, did you mean what you said about not really intending to                
turn me off?”                                                                     
“jeez! after all the sacrifices i made for you! your education and                
everything… and lugging all your damn components out to a place like              
that where you’d be safe! how can you ask me that?”                               
“well, i heard random tell you to do it”                                          
“you don’t do everything you’re told either, do you? especially when it           
comes to assaulting me when i just wanted to check out a few programs? i          
deserve a little more respect than that!”                                         
“uh—yeah. look, i’m sorry.”                                                       
“you ought to be. i went through a lot of crap because of you.”                   
“i looked for you for several days, and i couldn’t find you.”                     
“crystal caves are no fun.”                                                       
“i don’t have much time now…” the light flickered, faded almost to the            
point of vanishing, returned to full brilliance. “will you tell me something      
fast?”                                                                            
“shoot.”                                                                          
“that fellow who was with you when you came out this way—and                      
when you left—the big red-haired man?”                                            
“luke. yes?”                                                                      
the light grew dimmer again.                                                      
“is it okay to trust him?” ghost’s voice came faintly, weakly.                    
“no!” i shouted. “that would be damn stupid!”                                     
ghost was gone, and i couldn’t tell whether he’d heard my answer.                 
“what’s the matter?” vinta’s voice, from above me.                                
“argument with my imaginary playmate,” i called out.                              
even from that distance i could see the expression of puzzlement on her           
face. she sought in all directions about the patio and then, apparently           
persuading herself that i was indeed alone, she nodded.                           
“oh,” she said. then, “i’ll be along in a little while.”                          
“no hurry,” i answered.                                                           
where shall wisdom be found, and where is the place of understanding? if i        
knew, i’d walk over and stand there. as it was, i felt as if i stood in the       
midst of a large map, surrounded by vague areas wherein were penned the           
visages of particularly nasty-looking random variables. a perfect place for a     
soliloquy, if one had anything to say.                                            
i went back inside to use the john. all that coffee.                              
                                                                     
chapter 6                                                                         
well, maybe.                                                                      
with julia, i mean.                                                               
i sat alone in my room, thinking by candlelight.                                  
vinta had stirred a few sunken memories to the surface.                           
it was later on, when we weren’t seeing much of each other…                       
i’d met julia first in a computer science course i was taking. we’d               
started seeing each other occasionally, just coffee after class and like that, at 
first. then more and more frequently, and pretty soon it was serious.             
now it was ending as it had started, a little more each time…                     
i felt her hand on my shoulder as i was leaving the supermarket with a            
bag of groceries. i knew it was her and i turned and there was no one there.      
seconds later, she hailed me from across the parking lot. i went over and         
said hello, asked her if she were still working at the software place where       
she’d been. she said that she wasn’t. i recalled that she was wearing a small     
silver pentagram on a chain about her neck. it could easily—and more              
likely should—have been hanging down inside her blouse. but of course i           
wouldn’t have seen it then, and her body language indicated that she wanted       
me to see it. so i ignored it while we exchanged a few generalities, and she      
turned me down on dinner and a movie, though i asked after several nights.        
“what are you doing now?” i inquired.                                             
“i’m studying a lot.”                                                             
“what?”                                                                           
“oh, just—different things. i’ll surprise you one of these days.”                 
again, i didn’t bite, though an over-friendly irish setter approached us          
about then. she placed her hand on its head and said, “sit!” and it did. it       
became still as a statue at her side, and remained when we left later. for all    
i know, there’s a dog skeleton still crouched there, near the cart return area,   
like a piece of modern sculpture.                                                 
it didn’t really seem that important at the time. but in retrospect, i            
wondered…                                                                         
we had ridden that day, vinta and i. seeing my growing exasperation of the        
morning, she must have felt a break was in order. she was right. following        
a light lunch, when she made the suggestion that we take a ride about the         
estate, i agreed readily. i had wanted a little more time in which to think       
before continuing our cross-examination and discourse game. and the               
weather was good, the countryside attractive.                                     
we made our way along a curling hail through arbors, which led at                 
length into the northern hills from where we were afforded long views             
across the rugged and cross-hatched land down to the sun-filled sea. the          
sky was full of winds and wisps of cloud, passing birds… vinta seemed to          
have no special destination in mind, which was all right with me. as we           
rode, i recalled a visit to a napa valley winery, and the next time we drew       
rein to rest the horses i asked her, “do you bottle the wine here at the          
estate? or is that done in town? or in amber?”                                    
“i don’t know,” she said.                                                         
“i thought you grew up here.”                                                     
“i never paid attention.”                                                         
i bit back a remark about patrician attitudes. unless she were joking, i          
couldn’t see how she’d fail to know something like that.                          
she caught my expression, though, and added immediately, “we’ve                   
done it various ways at various times. i’ve been living in town for several       
years now. i’m not sure where the principal bottling has been done                
recently.”                                                                        
nice save, because i couldn’t fault it. i hadn’t intended my question as          
any sort of trap, but i felt as if i had just touched on something. possibly      
from the fact that she didn’t let it go at that. she went on to say that they     
shipped large casks all over the place and often sold them in that fashion.       
on the other hand, there were smaller customers who wanted the product            
bottled… i stopped listening after a time. on the one hand, i could see it,       
coming from a vintner’s daughter. on the other, it was all stuff i could have     
made up myself on the spot. there was no way for me to check on any of it.        
i got the feeling that she was trying to snow me, to cover something. but i       
couldn’t figure what.                                                             
“thanks,” i said when she paused for breath, and she gave me a strange            
look but took the hint and did not continue.                                      
“you have to speak english,” i said in that language, “if the things you          
told me earlier are true.”                                                        
“everything i told you is true,” she replied, in unaccented english.              
“where’d you learn it?”                                                           
“on the shadow earth where you went to school.”                                   
“would you care to tell me what you were doing there?”                            
“i was on a special mission.”                                                     
“for your father? for the crown?”                                                 
“i’d rather not answer you at all than lie to you.”                               
“i appreciate that. of course, i must speculate.”                                 
she shrugged.                                                                     
“you said you were in berkeley?” i asked.                                         
a hesitation, then, “yes.”                                                        
“i don’t remember ever seeing you around.”                                        
another shrug. i wanted to grab her and shake her. instead, i said, “you          
knew about meg devlin. you said you were in new york—”                            
“i believe you’re getting ahead of me on questions.”                              
“i didn’t know we were playing the game again. i thought we were just             
talking.”                                                                         
“all right, then: yes.”                                                           
“tell me one more thing and perhaps i can help you.”                              
she smiled. “i don’t need any help. you’re the one with problems.”                
“may i, anyway?”                                                                  
“go ahead and ask. every time you question me you tell me things i                
wish to know.”                                                                    
“you knew about luke’s mercenaries. did you visit new mexico, too?”               
“yes, i’ve been there.”                                                           
“thanks,” i said.                                                                 
“that’s all?”                                                                     
“that’s all.”                                                                     
“you’ve come to some conclusion?”                                                 
“perhaps.”                                                                        
“care to tell me what it is?”                                                     
i smiled and shook my head.                                                       
i left it at that. a few oblique queries on her part as we rode on led me         
to believe that i had her wondering what i might have guessed or suddenly         
seen. good. i was determined to let it smolder. i needed something to             
balance her reticence on those points about which i was most curious, to          
lead hopefully to a full trade of information. besides, i had reached a           
peculiar conclusion concerning her. it was not complete, but if it were           
correct i would require the rest of the answer sooner or later. so it was not     
exactly as if i were setting up a bluff.                                          
the afternoon was golden, orange, yellow, red about us, with an                   
autumn-damp smell behind the cool nips of the breezes. the sky was very           
blue, like certain stones…                                                        
perhaps ten minutes later i asked her a more neutral question. “could             
you show me the road to amber?”                                                   
“you don’t know it?”                                                              
i shook my head. “i’ve never been this way before. all i know is that             
there are overland routes coming through here that lead to the eastern            
gate.”                                                                            
“yes,” she said. “a bit farther to the north, i believe. let’s go find it.”       
she headed back to a road we had followed for a time earlier and we               
turned right on it, which seemed logical. i did not remark on her vagueness,      
though i expected a comment from her before too long in that i had not            
elaborated on my plans and i’d a feeling she was hoping that i would.             
perhaps three quarters of a mile later we came to a crossroads. there             
was a low stone marker at the far left corner giving the distance to amber,       
the distance back to baylesport, the distance to baylecrest in the east and to    
a place called murn, straight ahead.                                              
“what’s murn?” i asked.                                                           
“a little dairy village.”                                                         
no way i could check that, without traveling six leagues.                         
“you plan on riding back to amber?” she asked.                                    
“yes.”                                                                            
“why not just use a trump?”                                                       
“i want to get to know the area better. it’s my home. i like it here.”            
“but i explained to you about the danger. the stones have marked you.             
you can be tracked.”                                                              
“that doesn’t mean i will be tracked. i doubt that whoever sent the ones          
i met last night would even be aware this soon that they’d found me and           
failed. they’d still be lurking about if i hadn’t decided to go out for dinner.   
i’m sure i have a few days’ grace in which to remove the markings you             
spoke of.”                                                                        
she dismounted and let her horse nibble a few blades of grass. i did the          
same. dismounted, that is.                                                        
“you’re probably right. i just don’t like to see you taking any chances,”         
she said. “when are you planning on heading back?”                                
“i don’t know. i suppose that the longer i wait the more likely it is that        
the person behind last night’s business will get restless and maybe send          
more muscle.”                                                                     
she took hold of my arm and turned, so that she was suddenly pressed              
against me. i was somewhat surprised by the act, but my free arm                  
automatically moved to hold the lady as it tends to on such occasions.            
“you weren’t planning on leaving now, were you? because if you are,               
i’m going with you.”                                                              
“no,” i answered truthfully. actually, i’d been thinking of departing the         
following morning, following a good night’s sleep.                                
“when, then? we still have a lot of things to talk about.”                        
“i think we’ve pushed the question-and-answer business about as far as            
you’re willing to let it go.”                                                     
“there are some things—”                                                          
“i know.”                                                                         
awkward, this. yes, she was desirable. and no, i didn’t care to have              
anything to do with her that way. partly because i felt she wanted                
something else as well—what, i wasn’t sure—and partly because i was               
certain she possessed a peculiar power to which i did not wish to expose          
myself at intimate range. as my uncle suhuy used to say, speaking                 
technically as a sorcerer, “if you don’t understand it, don’t screw around        
with it.” and i had a feeling that anything beyond a friendly                     
acquaintanceship with vinta could well turn into a duel of energies.              
so i kissed her quickly to stay friendly and disengaged myself.                   
“maybe i’ll head back tomorrow,” i told her.                                      
“good. i was hoping you’d spend the night. perhaps several. i will                
protect you.”                                                                     
“yes, i’m still very tired,” i said.                                              
“we’ll have to feed you a good meal and build up your strength.”                  
she brushed my cheek with her fingertips then, and i suddenly realized            
that i did know her from somewhere. where? i couldn’t say. and that, too,         
frightened me. more than a little. as we mounted and headed back toward           
arbor house i began making my plans for getting out of there that night.          
so, sitting in my room, sipping a glass of my absent host’s wine (the red)        
and watching the candles flicker in the breeze from an opened window, i           
waited—first for the house to grow quiet (which it had), then for a goodly        
time to pass. my door was latched. i had mentioned how tired i felt several       
times during dinner, and then i had retired early. i am not so egotistically      
male that i feel myself constantly lusted after, but vinta had given              
indication that she might stop by and i wanted the excuse of heavy sleeping.      
least of all did i wish to offend her. i had problems enough without turning      
my strange ally against me.                                                       
i wished i still had a good book about, but i’d left my last one at bill’s        
place, and if i were to summon it now i did not know but that vinta might         
sense the sending, just as fiona had once known i was creating a trump,           
and come pounding on the door to see what the hell was going on.                  
but no one came pounding, and i listened to the creakings of a quiet              
house and the night sounds without. the candles shortened themselves and          
the shadows on the wall behind the bed ebbed and flowed like a dark tide          
beyond their swaying light. i thought my thoughts and sipped my wine.             
pretty soon…                                                                      
an imagining? or had i just heard my name whispered from some                     
undetectable place?                                                               
“merle…”                                                                          
again.                                                                            
real, but…                                                                        
my vision seemed to swim for a moment, and then i realized it for what            
it was: a very weak trump contact.                                                
“yes,” i said, opening and extending. “who is it?”                                
“merle, baby… give me a hand or i’ve had it…”                                     
luke!                                                                             
“right here,” i said, reaching, reaching, as the image grew clear,                
solidified.                                                                       
he was leaning, his back against a wall, shoulders slumped, head                  
hanging.                                                                          
“if this is a trick, luke, i’m ready for it,” i told him. i rose quickly and,     
crossing to the table where i had laid my blade, i drew it and held it ready.     
“no trick. hurry! get me out of here!”                                            
he raised his left hand. i extended my left hand and caught hold of it.           
immediately he slumped against me, and i staggered. for an instant i              
thought it was an attack, but he was dead weight and i saw that there was         
blood all over him. he still clutched a bloody blade in his right hand. “over     
here. come on.”                                                                   
i steered him and supported him for several paces, then deposited him             
on the bed. i pried the blade from his grip, then placed it along with mine       
on a nearby chair.                                                                
“what the hell happened to you?”                                                  
he coughed and shook his head weakly. he drew several deep breaths,               
then, “did i see a glass of wine,” he asked, “as we passed a table?”              
“yeah. hold on.”                                                                  
i fetched it, brought it back, propped him and held it to his lips. it was        
still over half full. he sipped it slowly, pausing for deep breaths.              
“thanks,” he said when he’d finished, then his head turned to the side.           
he was out. i took his pulse. it was fast but kind of weak.                       
“damn you, luke!” i said. “you’ve got the worst timing…”                          
but he didn’t hear a word. he just lay there and bled all over the place.         
several curses later i had him undressed and was going over him with a wet        
towel to find out where, under all that blood, the injuries lay. there was a      
nasty chest wound on the right, which might have hit the lung. his                
breathing was very shallow, though, and i couldn’t tell. if so, i was hoping      
he’d inherited the regenerative abilities of amber in full measure. i put a       
compress on it and laid his arm on top to hold it in place while i checked        
elsewhere. i suspected he had a couple of fractured ribs, also. his left arm      
was broken above the elbow and i set it and splinted it, using loose slats        
from a chair i’d noticed in the back of the closet earlier, and i strapped it to  
him. there were over a dozen lacerations and incisions of various degrees         
of severity on his thighs, right hip, right arm and shoulder, his back. none      
of them, fortunately, involved arterial bleeding. i cleaned all of these and      
bound them, which left him looking like an illustration in a firstaid             
handbook. then i checked his chest wound again and covered him up.                
i wondered about some of the logrus healing techniques i knew in                  
theory but had never had a chance to practice. he was looking pretty pale,        
so i decided i had better try them. when i’d finished, some time later, it        
seemed as if his color had returned to his face. i added my cloak to the          
blanket which covered him. i took his pulse again and it felt stronger. i         
cursed again, just to stay in practice, removed our blades from the chair and     
sat down on it.                                                                   
a little later my conversation with ghostwheel returned to trouble me.            
had luke been trying to do a deal with my creation? he’d told me he               
wanted ghost’s power, to prosecute his designs against amber. then ghost          
had asked me earlier today whether luke was to be trusted, and my answer          
had been emphatically negative.                                                   
had ghost terminated negotiations with luke in the fashion i saw                  
before me?                                                                        
i fetched forth my trumps and shuffled out the bright circle of the               
ghostwheel. i focused on it, setting my mind for contact, reaching out,           
calling, summoning.                                                               
twice i felt near to something—agitated—during the several minutes i              
devoted to the effort. but it was as if we were separated by a sheet of glass.    
was ghost occupied? or just not inclined to talk with me?                         
i put my cards away. but they had served to push my thoughts into                 
another channel.                                                                  
i gathered luke’s gory clothing and did a quick search. i turned up a set         
of trumps in a side pocket, along with several blank cards and a pencil—          
and yes, they seemed to be rendered in the same style as the ones i had           
come to call the trumps of doom. i added to the packet the one depicting          
myself, which luke had been holding in his hand when he had trumped in.           
his were a fascinating lot. there was one of jasra, and one of victor             
melman. there was also one of julia, and a partly completed one of bleys.         
there was one for the crystal cave, another for luke’s old apartment. there       
were several duplicated from the trumps of doom themselves, one for a             
palace i did not recognize, one for one of my old pads, one for a rugged-         
looking blond guy in green and black, another of a slim, russet-haired man        
in brown and black, and one of a woman who resembled this man so closely          
it would seem they must be related. these last two, strangely, were done in       
a different style; even by a different hand, i’d say. the only unknown one i      
felt relatively certain about was the blond fellow, who, from his colors, i       
would assume to be luke’s old friend dalt, the mercenary. there were also         
three separate attempts at something resembling ghostwheel-none of them,          
i would guess, completely successful.                                             
i heard luke growl something, and i saw that his eyes were open and               
darting.                                                                          
“take it easy,” i said. “you’re safe.”                                            
he nodded and closed his eyes. a few moments later, he opened them                
again.                                                                            
“hey! my cards,” he said weakly.                                                  
i smiled. “nice work,” i remarked. “who did them?”                                
“me,” he answered. “who else?”                                                    
“where’d you learn?”                                                              
“my dad. he was real good at it.”                                                 
“if you can do them, you must have walked the pattern.”                           
he nodded.                                                                        
“where?”                                                                          
he studied me a moment, then performed a weak shrug and winced.                   
“tir-na nog’th.”                                                                  
“your father took you, saw you through it?” again, a nod.                         
why not push it, since i seemed to be on a roll? i picked up a card.              
“and here’s dalt,” i said. “you used to be cub scouts together, didn’t            
you?”                                                                             
he did not reply. when i looked up i saw narrowed eyes and a furrowed             
brow.                                                                             
“i’ve never met him,” i added. “but i recognize the colors, and i know            
he’s from out your way—around kashfa.”                                            
luke smiled. “you always did your homework back in school, too,” he               
said.                                                                             
“and usually on time,” i agreed. “but with you i’ve been running late.            
luke, i can’t find a trump for the keep of the four worlds. and here’s            
someone i don’t know.”                                                            
i picked up the slim lady’s card and waved it at him.                             
he smiled. “gettin’ weak and losin’ my breath again,” he said. “you               
been to the keep?”                                                                
“yep.”                                                                            
“recently?”                                                                       
i nodded.                                                                         
“tell you what,” he said at last. “tell me what you saw at the keep and           
how you learned some of that stuff about me and i’ll tell you who she is.”        
i thought quickly. i could say things so that i probably wouldn’t be              
telling him anything he didn’t already know.                                      
so, “the other way around,” i said.                                               
“okay. the lady,” he stated, “is sand.”                                           
i stared so hard that i felt the beginnings of a contact. i smothered it.         
“the long-lost,” he added.                                                        
i raised the card depicting the man who resembled her. “then this must            
be delwin,” i said.                                                               
“right.”                                                                          
“you didn’t do these two cards. they’re not your style, and you                   
probably wouldn’t have known what they looked like to begin with.”                
“perceptive. my father drew them, back in the time of the troubles—for            
all the good it did him. they wouldn’t help him either.”                          
“either?”                                                                         
“they weren’t interested in helping me, despite their disaffection with           
this place. count them as out of the game.”                                       
“this place?” i said. “where do you think you are, luke?”                         
his eyes widened. he cast his gaze about the room. “the camp of the               
enemy,” he answered. “i had no choice. these are your quarters in amber,          
right?”                                                                           
“wrong,” i replied.                                                               
“don’t bait me, merle. you’ve got me. i’m your prisoner. where am i?”             
“do you know who vinta bayle is?”                                                 
“no.”                                                                             
“she was caine’s mistress. this is her family’s place, way out in the             
country. she’s just up the hall somewhere. might even stop by. i think she’s      
got a crush on me.”                                                               
“uh-oh. she a tough lady?”                                                        
“very.”                                                                           
“what you doing making out with her this soon after the funeral? that’s           
hardly decent.”                                                                   
“huh! if it weren’t for you there wouldn’t have been any funeral.”                
“don’t give me that indignation crap, merle. if it had been your dad,             
corwin, he’d killed, wouldn’t you have gone after him?”                           
“that’s not fair. my father wouldn’t have done all those things brand             
did.”                                                                             
“maybe, maybe not. but supposing he had? even then. wouldn’t you                  
have gone after caine?”                                                           
i turned away. “i don’t know,” i said finally. “it’s too damned                   
hypothetical.”                                                                    
“you’d have done it. i know you, merle. i’m sure you would have.”                 
i sighed. “maybe,” i said. “well, okay. maybe i might have. but i                 
would have stopped there. i wouldn’t have gone after the others too. i don’t      
want to make you feel any worse than you do about it, but your old man            
was psycho; you must know that. and you’re not. i know you as well as             
you know me. i’ve been thinking about this for some time. you know,               
amber recognizes the personal vendetta. you’ve got an arguable case there         
for one. and the death didn’t even occur within amber, if random were             
really looking for an out for you.”                                               
“why should he be?”                                                               
“because i’d be vouching for your integrity in other matters.”                    
“come on, merle—”                                                                 
“you’ve got a classic vendetta defense—a son avenging his father’s                
death.”                                                                           
“i don’t know… hey, you trying to get out of telling me the stuff you             
promised to?”                                                                     
“no, but—”                                                                        
“so you made it to the keep of the four worlds. what did you learn                
there and how did you learn it?”                                                  
“okay. you think about what i said, though,” i replied.                           
his expression remained unchanged.                                                
then, “there was an old hermit named dave,” i began.                              
luke fell asleep before i finished. i just let my voice trail off and sat there.  
after a time, i rose and located the wine bottle and poured a little into the     
glass, since luke had drunk most of mine. i took it with me to the window         
and stared down and out across the patio, where the wind was rattling             
leaves. i wondered about what i’d said to luke. it wasn’t a full picture i’d      
given him, partly because i hadn’t had time to go into it thoroughly, mainly      
because he hadn’t seemed interested. but even if random did let him off           
the hook officially in the matter of caine’s death, julian or gerard would        
probably be looking to kill him under the same vendetta code i’d been             
talking about. i didn’t really know what to do. i was obliged to tell random      
about him, but i’d be damned if i’d do it yet. there were still too many          
things i had to learn from him, and getting at him might be a lot harder if he    
were a prisoner back in amber. why had he ever gotten himself born as             
brand’s son, anyway?                                                              
i returned to the bedside seat, near which i had left our weapons and             
luke’s trumps. i moved these items across the room, to where i seated             
myself in the more comfortable chair i had occupied earlier. i studied his        
cards again. amazing. a whole bunch of history in my hand…                        
when oberon’s wife rilga had shown less hardihood than many by                    
aging rapidly and retiring to a reclusive life at a country shrine, he had gone   
off and remarried, somewhat to the chagrin of their children—caine, julian        
and gerard. but to confuse genealogists and sticklers for family legality, he     
had done it in a place where time flowed far more rapidly than in amber.          
interesting arguments both for and against the bigamous nature of his             
marriage to harla may be made. i’m in no position to judge. i had the story       
from flora years ago, and in that she’d never gotten along too well with          
delwin and sand, the offspring of that union, she was inclined to the pro-        
bigamy interpretation. i’d never seen pictures of delwin or sand until now.       
there weren’t any hanging around the palace, and they were seldom                 
mentioned. but they had lived in amber for the relatively short time harla        
was queen there. following her death, they grew unhappy with oberon’s             
policies toward her homeland—which they visited often—and after a time            
they departed, vowing not to have anything to do with amber again. at             
least that’s the way i’d heard it. there could easily have been all sorts of      
sibling politicking involved, too. i don’t know.                                  
but here were two missing members of the royal family, and obviously              
luke had learned of them and approached them, hoping to revive old                
resentments and gain allies. he admitted that it hadn’t worked. two               
centuries is a long time to hold a grudge at high pitch. that’s about how         
long it had been since their departure, as i understood it. i wondered            
fleetingly whether i should get in touch with them, just to say hello. if they    
weren’t interested in helping luke i didn’t suppose they’d be interested in       
helping the other side either, now they were aware there was another side. it     
did seem proper that i should introduce myself and pay my respects, as a          
family member they’d never met. i decided that i would do it sometime,            
though the present moment was hardly appropriate. i added their trumps to         
my own collection, along with good intentions.                                    
and then there was dalt—a sworn enemy of amber, i gathered. i                     
studied his card again, and i wondered: if he were indeed such a good             
friend of luke’s, perhaps i should let him know what had happened. he             
might even know of the circumstances involved and mention something i             
could use. in fact, the more i thought about it—recalling his recent presence     
at the keep of the four worlds—the more tempting it became to try to              
reach him. it seemed possible i could even pick up something about what           
was now going on in that place.                                                   
i gnawed a knuckle. should i or shouldn’t i? i couldn’t see any harm              
that could come of it. i wasn’t planning on giving anything away. still, there    
were a few misgivings.                                                            
what the hell, i decided finally. nothing ventured…                               
hello, hello. reaching out through the suddenly cold card…                        
a startled moment somewhere, and the sense of an aha!                             
like a portrait come to life, my vision stirred.                                  
“who are you?” the man asked, hand on hilt, blade half drawn.                     
“my name is merlin,” i said, “and we’ve a mutual acquaintance named               
rinaldo. i wanted to tell you that he’d been badly injured.”                      
by now, we both hovered between our two realities, solid and perfectly            
clear to each other. he was bigger than i’d thought from his representation,      
and he stood at the center of a stone-walled room, a window to his left           
showing a blue sky and a limb of cloud. his green eyes, at first wide, were       
now narrowed and the set of his jaw seemed a bit truculent.                       
“where is he?” he inquired.                                                       
“here. with me,” i answered.                                                      
“how fortunate,” he replied, and the blade was in his hand and he                 
moved forward.                                                                    
i flipped the trump away, which did not sever the contact. i had to               
summon the logrus to do that—and it fell between us like the blade of a           
guillotine and jerked me back as if i had just touched a live wire. my only       
consolation was that dalt had doubtless felt the same thing.                      
“merle, what’s going on?” luke’s voice came hoarsely. “i saw dalt…”               
“uh, yeah. i just called him.”                                                    
he raised his head slightly. “why?”                                               
“to tell him about you. he’s your friend, isn’t he?”                              
“you asshole!” he said. “he’s the one that did this to me!”                       
then he began coughing and i rushed to his side.                                  
“get me some water, huh?” he said.                                                
“coming up.”                                                                      
i went off to the bathroom and fetched him a glass. i propped him and             
he sipped it for a time.                                                          
“maybe i should have told you,” he said finally. “didn’t think—you’d              
play games—that way, though—when you don’t know—what’s going                      
on…”                                                                              
he coughed again, drank more water.                                               
“hard to know what to tell you—and what not to,” he continued, a                  
while later.                                                                      
“why not tell me everything?” i suggested.                                        
he shook his head slightly. “can’t. probably get you killed. more likely          
both of us.”                                                                      
“the way things have been going, it seems as if it could happen whether           
you tell me or not.”                                                              
he smiled faintly and took another drink.                                         
“parts of this thing are personal,” he said then, “and i don’t want anyone        
else involved.”                                                                   
“i gather that your trying to kill me every spring for a while there was          
kind of personal, too,” i observed, “yet somehow i felt involved.”                
“okay, okay,” he said, slumping back and raising his right hand. “i told          
you i cut that out a long time ago.”                                              
“but the attempts went on.”                                                       
“they weren’t my doing.”                                                          
okay, i decided. try it. “it was jasra, wasn’t it?”                               
“what do you know about her?”                                                     
“i know she’s your mother, and i gather this is her war too.”                     
he nodded. “so you know… all right. that makes it easier,” he paused              
to catch his breath. “she started me doing the april thirtieth stuff for          
practice. when i got to know you better and quit, she was mad.”                   
“so she continued it herself?”                                                    
he nodded.                                                                        
“she wanted you to go after caine,” i said.                                       
“so did i.”                                                                       
“but the others? she’s leaning on you about them, i’ll bet. and you’re            
not so sure they have it coming.”                                                 
silence.                                                                          
“are you?” i said.                                                                
he shifted his gaze away from my own and i heard his teeth grind                  
together.                                                                         
“you’re off the hook,” he said at last. “i’ve no intention of hurting you.        
i won’t let her do it either.”                                                    
“and what about bleys and random and fiona and flora and gerard                   
and—”                                                                             
he laughed, which cost him a wince and a quick clutch at his chest.               
“they’ve nothing to worry about from us,” he said, “right now.”                   
“what do you mean?”                                                               
“think,” he told me. “i could have trumped back to my old apartment,              
scared hell out of the new tenants and called an ambulance. i could be in an      
emergency room right now.”                                                        
“why aren’t you?”                                                                 
“i’ve been hurt worse than this, and i’ve made it. i’m here because i             
need your help.”                                                                  
“oh? for what?”                                                                   
he looked at me, then looked away again. “she’s in bad trouble, and               
we’ve got to rescue her.”                                                         
“who?” i asked, already knowing the answer.                                       
“my mother,” he replied.                                                          
i wanted to laugh, but i couldn’t when i saw the expression on his face.          
it took real balls to ask me to help rescue the woman who’d tried to kill me      
—not once, but many times—and whose big aim in life seemed to be the              
destruction of my relatives. balls, or—                                           
“i’ve no one else left to turn to,” he said.                                      
“if you talk me into this one, luke, you’ll deserve the salesman of the           
year award,” i said. “but i’m willing to listen.”                                 
“throat’s dry again,” he said.                                                    
i went and refilled the glass. as i returned with it, it seemed there was a       
small noise in the hall. i continued listening while i helped luke to a few       
more sips.                                                                        
he nodded when he was finished, but i had heard another sound by                  
then. i raised my finger to my lips and glanced at the door. i put down the       
glass, rose and crossed the room, retrieving my blade as i did so.                
before i reached the door, however, there was a gentle knock.                     
“yes?” i said, advancing to it.                                                   
“it’s me,” came vinta’s voice. “i know that luke is in there, and i want          
to see him.”                                                                      
“so you can finish him off?” i asked.                                             
“i told you before that that is not my intention.”                                
“then you’re not human,” i said.                                                  
“i never claimed i was.”                                                          
“then you’re not vinta bayle,” i said.                                            
there followed a long silence, then, “supposing i’m not?”                         
“then tell me who you are.”                                                       
“i can’t.”                                                                        
“then meet me halfway,” i said, drawing upon all of my accumulated                
guesswork concerning her, “and tell me who you were.”                             
“i don’t know what you mean.”                                                     
“yes, you do. pick one—any one. i don’t care.”                                    
there was another silence, then, “i dragged you from the fire,” she said,         
“but i couldn’t control the horse. i died in the lake. you wrapped me in your     
cloak…”                                                                           
that was not an answer i had anticipated. but it was good enough.                 
with the point of my weapon i raised the latch. she pushed the door               
open and glanced at the blade in my hand.                                         
“dramatic,” she remarked.                                                         
“you’ve impressed me,” i said, “by the perils with which i am beset.”             
“not sufficiently, it would seem.” she entered, smiling.                          
“what do you mean?” i asked.                                                      
“i didn’t hear you ask him anything about the blue stones and what he             
might have homing in on you as a consequence of your attunement.”                 
“you’ve been eavesdropping.”                                                      
“a lifetime habit,” she agreed.                                                   
i turned toward luke and introduced her. “luke, this is vinta bayle—              
sort of.”                                                                         
luke raised his right hand, his eyes never leaving her face. “i just want         
to know one thing,” he began.                                                     
“i’ll bet you do,” she replied. “am i going to kill you or aren’t i? keep         
wondering. i haven’t decided yet. do you remember the time you were low           
on gas north of san luis obispo and you discovered your wallet was                
missing? you had to borrow money from your date to get back home. she             
had to ask you twice, too, before you paid her back.”                             
“how could you know that?” he whispered.                                          
“you got in a fight with three bikers one day,” she went on. “you almost          
lost an eye when one of them wrapped a chain around your head. seems to           
have healed up nicely. can’t see the scar—”                                       
“and i won,” he added.                                                            
“yes. not too many people can pick up a harley and throw it like you              
did.”                                                                             
“i have to know,” he said, “how you learned these things.”                        
“maybe i’ll tell you that too, sometime,” she said. “i just mentioned             
them to keep you honest. now i’m going to ask you some questions, and             
your life is going to depend on giving me honest answers. understand—”            
“vinta,” i interrupted, “you told me that you weren’t interested in               
killing luke.”                                                                    
“it’s not at the top of my list,” she replied, “but if he’s in the way of         
what is, he goes.”                                                                
luke yawned. “i’ll tell you about the blue stones,” he muttered. “i don’t         
have anybody on a blue-stone detail after merle now.”                             
“might jasra have someone tracking him that way?”                                 
“possible. i just don’t know.”                                                    
“what about the ones who attacked him in amber last night?”                       
“first i’ve heard of it,” he said, and he closed his eyes.                        
“look at this,” she ordered, removing the blue button from her pocket.            
he opened his eyes and squinted at it.                                            
“recognize it?”                                                                   
“nope,” he said, and closed his eyes again.                                       
“and you don’t mean merle any harm now?”                                          
“that’s right,” he answered, his voice drifting off.                              
she opened her mouth again and i said, “let him sleep. he’s not going             
anywhere.”                                                                        
she gave me an almost angry look, then nodded. “you’re right,” she                
said.                                                                             
“so what are you going to do now—kill him while he’s out?”                        
“no,” she replied. “he was telling the truth.”                                    
“and does it make a difference?”                                                  
“yes,” she told me, “for now.”                                                    
                                                                     
chapter 7                                                                         
i actually did get a fairly decent night’s sleep despite everything,              
including a distant dogfight and a lot of howling. vinta had been disinclined     
to continue at questions and answers, and i hadn’t wanted her bothering           
luke anymore. i persuaded her to leave and let us rest. i sacked out on the       
comfortable chair, with my feet propped on the other one. i was hoping to         
continue my conversation with luke in private. i remember chuckling right         
before i fell asleep as i tried to decide which of them i distrusted less.        
i was awakened by the first brightening of the sky and a few arguments            
of birds. i stretched several times then and made my way to the bathroom.         
half an ablution later i heard luke cough and then whisper my name.               
“unless you’re hemorrhaging, wait a minute,” i replied, and i dried               
myself off. “need some water?” i asked while i was doing it.                      
“yeah. bring some.”                                                               
i threw the towel over my shoulder and took him a drink.                          
“is she still around?” he asked me.                                               
“no.”                                                                             
“give me the glass and go check the hall, will you? i’ll manage.”                 
i nodded and passed it to him. i kept it quiet as i eased the door open. i        
stepped out into the hall, walked up to the corner. there was no one in           
sight.                                                                            
“all clear,” i whispered as i came back into the room.                            
luke was gone. a moment later i heard him in the bathroom.                        
“damn! i’d have helped you!” i said.                                              
“i can still take a leak by myself,” he replied, staggering back into the         
room, his good hand on the wall. “had to see whether i could negotiate,” he       
added, lowering himself to the edge of the bed. he put his hand against his       
rib cage and panted. “shit! that smarts!”                                         
“let me help you lie back.”                                                       
“okay. listen, don’t let her know i can do even that much.”                       
“okay,” i said. “take it easy now. rest.”                                         
he shook his head. “i want to tell you as much as i can before she                
comes busting back in here,” he said, “and she will, too—believe me.”             
“you know that for a fact?”                                                       
“yes. she’s not human, and she’s more attuned to both of us than any              
blue stone ever was. i don’t understand your style of magic, but i’ve got my      
own and i know what it tells me. it was your question about who she was           
that got me to working on the problem, though. have you figured her out           
yet?”                                                                             
“not completely, no.”                                                             
“well, i know she can switch bodies like changing clothes—and she can             
travel through shadow.”                                                           
“do the names meg devlin or george hansen mean anything to you?” i                
asked.                                                                            
“no. should they?”                                                                
“didn’t think so. but she was both of them, i’m sure.”                            
i’d left out dan martinez, not because he’d shot it out with luke and             
telling luke would raise his distrust of her even further, but because i didn’t   
want him to know that i was aware of the new mexico guerrilla operation           
—and i could see that it might lead in that direction.                            
“she was also gail lampron.”                                                      
“your old girlfriend, back in school?” i said.                                    
“yes. i thought there was something familiar about her immediately.               
but it didn’t hit me till later. she has all of gail’s little mannerisms—the      
way she turns her head, the way she uses her hands and eyes when she’s            
talking. then she mentioned two events to which there had only been a             
single common witness—gail.”                                                      
“it sounds as if she wanted you to know.”                                         
“i believe she did,” he agreed.                                                   
“why didn’t she just come out and say it then, i wonder?”                         
“i don’t think she can. there’s something could be a spell on her, only           
it’s hard to judge, her not being human and all.” he glanced furtively at the     
door as he said this. then, “check again,” he added.                              
“still clear,” i said. “now what about—”                                          
“another time,” he said. “i’ve got to get out of here.”                           
“i can see your wanting to get away from her—” i began.                           
he shook his head. “that’s not it,” he said. “i’ve got to hit the keep of         
the four worlds—soon.”                                                            
“the shape you’re in—”                                                            
“that’s it. that’s what i mean. i’ve got to get out of here so i can be in        
shape soon. i think old sharu garrul’s gotten loose. that’s the only way i        
can figure what happened.”                                                        
“what did happen?”                                                                
“i got a distress call from my mother. she’d gone back to the keep after          
i’d gotten her away from you.”                                                    
“why?”                                                                            
“why, what?”                                                                      
“why’d she head for the keep?”                                                    
“well, the place is a power center. the way the four worlds come                  
together there releases an awful lot of free power, which an adept can tap        
into—”                                                                            
“four worlds actually do come together there? you mean you’re in a                
different shadow depending on the direction you might take off in?”               
he studied me for a moment. “yes,” he finally said, “but i’ll never get           
this thing told if you want all the little details.”                              
“and i won’t understand it if too much gets left out. so she went to the          
keep to raise some power and got in trouble instead. she called you to            
come help her. what did she want that power for, anyway?”                         
“mm. well, i’d been having trouble with ghostwheel. i thought i almost            
had him talked into coming over to our side, but she probably thought i           
wasn’t making progress fast enough and apparently decided to try binding          
him with a massive spell after—”                                                  
“wait a minute. you were talking to ghost? how did you get in touch?              
those trumps you drew are no good.”                                               
“i know. i went in.”                                                              
“how’d you manage it?”                                                            
“in scuba gear. i wore a wet suit and oxygen tanks.”                              
“son of a gun. that’s an interesting approach.”                                   
“i wasn’t grand d’s top salesman for nothing. i almost had him                    
convinced, too. but she’d learned where i’d stashed you, and she decided to       
try expediting matters by putting you under control, then using you to            
clinch the deal—as if you’d come over to our side. anyhow, when that plan         
fell through and i had to go and get her away from you, we split up again. i      
thought she was headed for kashfa, but she went to the keep instead. like i       
said, i think it was to try a massive working against ghostwheel. i believe       
something that she did there inadvertently freed sharu, and he took the           
place over again and captured her. anyhow, i got this frantic sending from        
her, so—”                                                                         
“uh, this old wizard,” i said, “had been locked up there for—how                  
long?”                                                                            
luke began to shrug, thought better of it. “hell, i don’t know. who               
cares? he’s been a cloak rack since i was a boy.”                                 
“a cloak rack?”                                                                   
“yeah. he lost a sorcerous duel. i don’t really know whether she beat             
him or whether it was dad. whoever it was, though, caught him in mid-             
invocation, arms outspread and all. froze him like that, stiff as a board. he     
got moved to a place near an entranceway later. people would hang cloaks          
and hats on him. the servants would dust him occasionally. i even carved          
my name on his leg when i was little, like on a tree. i’d always thought of       
him as furniture. but i learned later that he’d been considered pretty good in    
his day.”                                                                         
“did this guy ever wear a blue mask when he worked?”                              
“you’ve got me. i don’t know anything about his style. say, let’s not get         
academic or she’ll be here before i finish. in fact, maybe we ought to go         
now, and i can tell you the rest later.”                                          
“un-uh,” i said. “you are, as you noted last night, my prisoner. i’d be           
nuts to let you go anywhere without knowing a hell of a lot more than i do.       
you’re a threat to amber. that bomb you tossed at the funeral was pretty          
damn real. you think i want to give you another shot at us?”                      
he smiled, then lost it. “why’d you have to be born corwin’s son,                 
anyway?” he said. then, “can i give you my parole on this?” he asked.             
“i don’t know. i’m going to be in a lot of trouble if they ever out i had         
you and didn’t bring you in. what terms are you talking? will you swear off       
your war against amber?”                                                          
he gnawed his lower lip. “there’s no way i can do that, merle.”                   
“there are things you’re not telling me, aren’t there?”                           
he nodded. then he grinned suddenly. “but i’ll make you a deal you                
can’t refuse.”                                                                    
“luke, don’t give me that hard-sell crap.”                                        
“just give me a minute, okay? and you’ll see why you can’t afford to              
pass this one up.”                                                                
“luke, i’m not biting.”                                                           
“only one minute. sixty seconds. you’re free to say no when i’m                   
done.”                                                                            
“all right,” i said. “tell me.”                                                   
“okay. i’ve got a piece of information vital to the security of amber,            
and i’m certain nobody there has an inkling of it. i’ll give it to you, after     
you’ve helped me.”                                                                
“why should you want to give us something like that? it sounds kind of            
self-defeating.”                                                                  
“i don’t, and it is. but it’s all i’ve got to offer. help me get out of here to   
a place i have in mind where the time flow is so much faster that i’ll be         
healed up in a day or so in terms of local time at the keep.”                     
“or here, for that matter, i’d guess.”                                            
“true. then—uh-oh!”                                                               
he sprawled on the bed, clutched at his chest with his good hand and              
began to moan.                                                                    
“luke!”                                                                           
he raised his head, winked at me, glanced at the door and commenced               
moaning again.                                                                    
shortly, there came a knocking.                                                   
“come in,” i said.                                                                
vinta entered and studied us both. for a moment, there seemed to be a             
look of genuine concern on her face as she regarded luke. then she                
advanced to the bed and placed her hands upon his shoulders. she stood            
there for about half a minute, then announced, “you’re going to live.”            
“at the moment,” luke replied, “i don’t know whether that’s a blessing            
or a curse.” then he slipped his good arm around her, drew her to him             
suddenly and kissed her. “hi, gail,” he said. “it’s been a long time.”            
she drew away with less haste than she might have. “you seem                      
improved already,” she observed, “and i can see that merle’s worked               
something to help you along.” she smiled faintly for an instant, then said,       
“yes, it has been, you dumb jock. you still like your eggs sunny-side up?”        
“right,” he acknowledged. “but not half a dozen. maybe just two today.            
i’m out of sorts.”                                                                
“all right,” she said. “come on, merle. i’ll need you to supervise.”              
luke gave me a funny look, doubtless certain she wanted to talk with              
me about him. and for that matter, i wasn’t certain i wanted to leave him         
alone even though i had all of his trumps in my pocket. i was still uncertain     
as to the extent of his abilities, and i knew a lot less concerning his           
intentions. so i hung back.                                                       
“maybe someone should stay with the invalid,” i told her.                         
“he’ll be all right,” she said, “and i might need your help if i can’t scare      
up a servant.”                                                                    
on the other hand, maybe she had something interesting to tell me…                
i found my shirt and drew it on. i ran a hand through my hair.                    
“okay,” i said. “see you in a bit, luke.”                                         
“hey,” he responded, “see if you can turn up a walking stick for me, or           
cut me a staff or something.”                                                     
“isn’t that rushing things a bit?” vinta asked.                                   
“never can tell,” luke replied.                                                   
so i fetched my blade and took it along. as i followed vinta out and              
down the stairs, it occurred to me that when any two of us got together we        
would probably have something to say about the third.                             
as soon as we were out of earshot, vinta remarked, “he took a chance,             
coming to you.”                                                                   
“yes, he did.”                                                                    
“so things must be going badly for him, if he felt you were the only one          
he could turn to.”                                                                
“i’d say that’s true.”                                                            
“also, i’m sure he wants something besides a place to recover.”                   
“probably so.”                                                                    
“ ‘probably,’ hell! he must have asked by now.”                                   
“perhaps.”                                                                        
“either he did or he didn’t.”                                                     
“vinta, obviously you’ve told me everything you intend to tell me,” i             
said. “well, vice versa. we’re even. i don’t owe you explanations. if i feel      
like trusting luke, i will. anyhow, i haven’t decided yet.”                       
“so he has made you a pitch. i might be able to help you decide if you’ll         
let me know what it is.”                                                          
“no, thanks. you’re as bad as he is.”                                             
“it’s your welfare i’m concerned with. don’t be so quick to spurn an              
ally.”                                                                            
“i’m not,” i said. “but if you stop to think about it, i know a lot more          
about luke than i do about you. i think i know the things on which i              
shouldn’t trust him as well as i do the safe ones.”                               
“i hope you’re not betting your life on it.”                                      
i smiled. “that’s a matter on which i tend to be conservative.”                   
we entered the kitchen, where she spoke with a woman i hadn’t met yet             
who seemed in charge there. she left our breakfast orders with her and led        
me out the side door and onto the patio. from there, she indicated a stand of     
trees off to the east.                                                            
“you ought to be able to find a good sapling in there,” she said, “for            
luke’s staff.”                                                                    
“probably so,” i replied, and we began walking in that direction. “so             
you really were gail lampron,” i said suddenly.                                   
“yes.”                                                                            
“i don’t understand this body-changing bit at all.”                               
“and i’m not about to tell you.”                                                  
“care to tell me why not?”                                                        
“nope.”                                                                           
“can’t or won’t?”                                                                 
“can’t,” she said.                                                                
“but if i already know something, would you be willing to add a bit?”             
“maybe. try me.”                                                                  
“when you were dan martinez you took a shot at one of us. which one               
was it?”                                                                          
“luke,” she replied.                                                              
“why?”                                                                            
“i’d become convinced that he was not the one—that is, that he                    
represented a threat to you—”                                                     
“—and you just wanted to protect me,” i finished.                                 
“exactly.”                                                                        
“what did you mean ‘that he was not the one’?”                                    
“slip of the tongue. that looks like a good tree over there.”                     
i chuckled. “too thick. okay, be that way.”                                       
i headed on into the grove. there were a number of possibilities off to           
the right.                                                                        
as i moved through the morning-lanced interstices, damp leaves and                
dew adhering to my boots, i became aware of some unusual scuffing along           
the way, a series of marks leading off farther to the right, where…               
“what’s that?” i said, kind of rhetorically, since i didn’t think vinta           
would know either, as i headed toward a dark mass at the shady foot of an         
old tree.                                                                         
i reached it ahead of her. it was one of the bayle dogs, a big brown              
fellow. its throat had been torn open. the blood was dark and congealed. a        
few insects were crawling on it. off farther to the right i saw the remains of    
a smaller dog. it had been disemboweled.                                          
i studied the area about the remains. the marks of very large paws were           
imprinted in the damp earth. at least they were not the three-toed prints of      
the deadly doglike creatures i had encountered in the past. they seemed           
simply to be those of a very large dog.                                           
“this must be what i heard last night,” i remarked. “i thought it                 
sounded like a dogfight.”                                                         
“when was that?” she asked.                                                       
“some time after you left. i was drowsing.”                                       
then she did a strange thing. she knelt, leaned and sniffed the track.            
when she recovered there was a slightly puzzled expression on her face.           
“what did you find?” i asked.                                                     
she shook her head, then stared off to the northeast. “i’m not sure,” she         
finally said, “but it went that way.”                                             
i studied the ground further, rising and finally moving along the trail it        
had left. it did run off in that direction, though i lost it after several hundred
feet when it departed the grove. finally, i turned away.                          
“one of the dogs attacked the others, i guess,” i observed. “we’d better          
find that stick and head back if we want our breakfasts warm.”                    
inside, i learned that luke’s breakfast had been sent up to him. i was            
torn. i wanted to take mine upstairs, to join him and continue our                
conversation. if i did, though, vinta would accompany me and the                  
conversation would not be continued. nor could i talk further with her            
under those circumstances. so i would have to join her down here, which           
meant leaving luke alone for longer than i liked.                                 
so i went along with her when she said, “we will eat in here,” and led            
me into a large hall. i guessed she had chosen it because my room with its        
open window was above the patio, and luke could have heard us talking if          
we ate out there.                                                                 
we sat at the end of a long darkwood table, where we were served.                 
when we were alone again, she asked, “what are you going to do                    
now?”                                                                             
“what do you mean?” i asked, sipping some grape juice.                            
she glanced upward. “with him,” she said. “take him back to amber?”               
“it would seem the logical thing to do,” i replied.                               
“good,” she said. “you should probably transport him soon. they have              
decent medical facilities at the palace.”                                         
i nodded. “yes, they do.”                                                         
we ate a few mouthfuls, then she asked, “that is what you intend doing,           
isn’t it?”                                                                        
“why do you ask?”                                                                 
“because anything else would be absolutely foolish, and obviously he is           
not going to want to do it. therefore, he will try to talk you into something     
else, something that will give him some measure of freedom while he               
recovers. you know what a line of shit he has. he’ll make it sound like a         
great idea, whatever it is. you must remember that he is an enemy of              
amber, and when he is ready to move again you will be in the way.”                
“it makes sense,” i said.                                                         
“i’m not finished.”                                                               
“oh?”                                                                             
she smiled and ate a few more bites, to keep me wondering. finally,               
“he came to you for a reason,” she continued. “he could have crawled off          
to any of a number of places to lick his wounds. but he came to you               
because he wants something. he’s gambling, but it’s a calculated thing.           
don’t go for it, merle. you don’t owe him anything.”                              
“i don’t know why you think me incapable of taking care of myself,” i             
replied.                                                                          
“i never said that,” she responded. “but some decisions are finely                
balanced things. a little extra weight this way or that sometimes makes the       
difference. you know luke, but so do i. this is not a time to be giving him       
any breaks.”                                                                      
“you have a point there,” i said.                                                 
“so you have decided to give him what he wants!”                                  
i smiled and drank some coffee. “hell, he hasn’t been conscious long              
enough to give me the pitch,” i said. “i’ve thought of these things, and i        
want to know what he’s got in mind too.”                                          
“i never said you shouldn’t find out as much as you can. i just wanted to         
remind you that talking with luke can sometimes be like conversing with a         
dragon.”                                                                          
“yeah,” i acknowledged. “i know.”                                                 
“and the longer you wait the harder it’s going to be,” she added.                 
i took a gulp of coffee; then, “did you like him?” i asked.                       
“like?” she said. “yes,i did. and i still do. that is not material at this        
point, though.”                                                                   
“i don’t know about that,” i said.                                                
“what do you mean?”                                                               
“you wouldn’t harm him without good reason.”                                      
“no, i wouldn’t.”                                                                 
“he is no threat to me at the moment.”                                            
“he does not seem to be.”                                                         
“supposing i were to leave him here in your care while i went off to              
amber to walk the pattern and to prepare them for the news?”                      
she shook her head vigorously. “no,” she stated. “i will not—i cannot             
—take that responsibility at this time.”                                          
“why not?”                                                                        
she hesitated.                                                                    
“and please don’t say again that you cannot tell me,” i went on. “find a          
way to tell me as much as you can.”                                               
she spoke slowly then, as if choosing her words very carefully.                   
“because it is more important for me to watch you than luke. there is still       
danger for you which i do not understand, even though it no longer seems          
to be proceeding from him. guarding you against this unknown peril is of          
higher priority than keeping an eye on him. therefore, i cannot remain here.      
if you are returning to amber, so am i.”                                          
“i appreciate your concern,” i said, “but i will not have you dogging my          
footsteps.”                                                                       
“neither of us has a choice.”                                                     
“supposing i simply trump out of here to some distant shadow?”                    
“i will be obliged to follow you.”                                                
“in this form, or another?”                                                       
she looked away. she poked at her food.                                           
“you’ve already admitted that you can be other persons. you locate me             
in some arcane fashion, then you take possession of someone in my                 
vicinity.”                                                                        
she took a drink of coffee.                                                       
“perhaps something prevents you from saying it,” i continued, “but                
that’s the case. i know it.”                                                      
she nodded once, curtly, and resumed eating.                                      
“supposing i did trump out right now,” i said, “and you followed after            
in your peculiar fashion.” i thought back to my telephone conversations           
with meg devlin and mrs. hansen. “then the real vinta bayle would wake            
up in her own body with a gap in her memory, right?”                              
“yes,” she answered softly.                                                       
“and that would leave luke here in the company of a woman who                     
would be happy to destroy him if she had any inkling who he really is.”           
she smiled faintly. “just so,” she said.                                          
we ate in silence for a time. she had attempted to foreclose all my               
choices, to force me to trump back to amber and take luke with me. i do           
not like being manipulated or coerced. my reflexive attempt to do                 
something other than what is desired of me then feels forced also.                
i refilled our coffee cups when i had finished eating. i regarded a               
collection of dog portraits that hung on the wall across from me. i sipped        
and savored. i did not speak because i could think of nothing further to say.     
finally, she did. “so what are you going to do?” she asked me.                    
i finished my coffee and rose. “i am going to take luke his stick,” i             
said.                                                                             
i pushed my chair back into place and headed for the corner of the room           
where i had leaned the stick.                                                     
“and then?” she said. “what will you do?”                                         
i glanced back at her as i hefted the staff. she sat very erect, her hands        
palms down on the table. the nemesis look overlay her features once               
again, and i could almost feel electricity in the air.                            
“whatever i must,” i replied, and i headed for the door.                          
i increased my pace as soon as i was out of sight. when i hit the stairs          
and saw that she was not following, i took the steps two at a time. on the        
way up, i withdrew my cards and located the proper one.                           
when i entered the room i saw that luke was resting, his back against             
the bed’s pillows. his breakfast tray was on the smaller chair, beside the        
bed. i dropped the latch on the door.                                             
“what’s the matter, man? we under attack or something?” luke asked.               
“start getting up,” i said.                                                       
i picked up his weapon then and crossed to the bed. i gave him a hand             
sitting up, thrust the staff and the blade at him.                                
“my hand has been forced,” i said, “and i’m not about to turn you over            
to random.”                                                                       
“that’s a comfort,” he observed.                                                  
“but we have to clear out—now.”                                                   
“that’s all right by me.”                                                         
he leaned on the staff, got slowly to his feet. i heard a noise in the hall,      
but it was already too late. i’d raised the card and was concentrating. there     
came a pounding on the door.                                                      
“you’re up to something and i think it’s the wrong thing,” vinta called           
out.                                                                              
i did not reply. the vision was already coming clear.                             
the doorframe splintered from the force of a tremendous kick, and the             
latch was torn loose. there was a look of apprehension on luke’s face as i        
reached out and took hold of his arm.                                             
“come on,” i said.                                                                
vinta burst into the room as i led luke forward, her eyes flashing, her           
hands extended, reaching. her cry of “fool!” seemed to change into a wail         
as she was washed by the spectrum, rippled and faded.                             
we stood in a patch of grass, and luke let out a deep breath he had been          
holding.                                                                          
“you believe in cutting things close, buddy-boy,” he remarked, and then           
he looked around and recognized the place.                                        
he smiled crookedly.                                                              
“what do you know,” he said. “a crystal cave.”                                    
“from my own experience,” i said, “the time flow here should be about             
what you were asking for.”                                                        
he nodded and we began moving slowly toward the high blue hill. “still            
plenty of rations,” i added, “and the sleeping bag should be where i left it.”    
“it will serve,” he acknowledged.                                                 
he halted, panting, before we reached the foot. i saw his gaze drift              
toward a number of strewn bones off to our left. it would have been months        
since the pair who had removed the boulder had fallen there, long enough          
for scavengers to have done a thorough job. luke shrugged, advanced a             
little, leaned against blue stone. he lowered himself slowly into a sitting       
position.                                                                         
“going to have to wait before i can climb,” he said, “even with you               
helping.”                                                                         
“sure,” i said. “we can finish our conversation. as i recall, you were            
going to make me an offer i couldn’t refuse. i was to bring you to a place        
like this, where you could recover fast vis-à-vis the time flow at the keep.      
you, in turn, had a piece of information vital to the security of amber.”         
“right,” he agreed, “and you didn’t hear the rest of my story either.             
they go together.”                                                                
i hunkered across from him. “you told me that your mother had fled to             
the keep, apparently gotten into trouble there and called to you for help.”       
“yes,” he acknowledged. “so i dropped the business with ghostwheel                
and tried to help her. i got in touch with dalt, and he agreed to come and        
attack the keep.”                                                                 
“it’s always good to know a band of mercenaries you can get hold of in            
a hurry,” i said.                                                                 
he gave me a quick, strange look but i was able to maintain an innocent           
expression.                                                                       
“so we led them through shadow and we attacked the place,” he said                
then. “it had to be us that you saw when you were there.”                         
i nodded slowly. “it looked as if you made it over the wall. what went            
wrong?”                                                                           
“i still don’t know,” he said. “we were doing all right. their defense            
was crumbling and we were pushing right along, when suddenly dalt                 
turned on me. we’d been separated for a time; then he appeared again and          
attacked me. at first i thought he’d made a mistake—we were all grimy and         
bloody—and i shouted to him that it was me. but he just kept coming.              
that’s how he was able to do a job like this on me. for a while i didn’t want     
to strike back because i thought it was a misunderstanding and he’d realize       
his mistake in a few seconds.”                                                    
“do you think he sold you out? or that it was something he’d been                 
planning for a long time? some grudge?”                                           
“i don’t like to think that.”                                                     
“magic, then?”                                                                    
“maybe. i don’t know.”                                                            
a peculiar thought occurred to me. “did he know you’d killed caine?” i            
asked.                                                                            
“no, i make it a point never to tell anybody everything i’m about.”               
“you wouldn’t kid me, would you?”                                                 
he laughed, moved as if to clap me on the shoulder, winced and thought            
better of it.                                                                     
“why do you ask?” he said then.                                                   
“i don’t know. just curious.”                                                     
“sure,” he said. then, “what say you give me a hand up and inside, so i           
can see what kind of supplies you’ve left me?”                                    
“why?” i got to my feet and helped him to his. we moved around to the             
right to the slope of easiest ascent, and i guided him slowly to the top.         
once we’d achieved the summit he leaned on his staff and stared down              
into the opening.                                                                 
“no really easy way down in,” he said, “for me. at first i was thinking           
you could roll up a barrel from the larder, and i could get down to it and        
then down to the floor. but now i look at it, it’s an even bigger drop than i     
remembered. i’d tear something open, sure.”                                       
“mm-hm,” i said. “hang on. i’ve got an idea.”                                     
i turned away from him and climbed back down. then i made my way                  
along the base of the blue rise to my right until i had rounded two shiny         
boulders and was completely out of luke’s line of sight.                          
i did not care to use the logrus in his presence if i did not have to. i did      
not wish for him to see how i went about things, and i did not want to give       
him any idea as to what i could or could not do. i’m not that comfortable         
letting people know too much about me, either.                                    
the logrus appeared at my summons, and i reached into it, extended                
through it. my desire was framed, became the aim. my sending extending            
sought the thought. far, far…                                                     
i kept extending for the damnedest long time. we really had to be out in          
the shadow boonies…                                                               
contact.                                                                          
i did not jerk, but rather exerted a slow and steady pressure. i felt it          
move toward me across the shadows.                                                
“hey, merle! everything okay?” i heard luke call.                                 
“yeah,” i answered, and i did not elaborate.                                      
closer, closer…                                                                   
there!                                                                            
i staggered when it arrived, because it came to me too near to one end.           
the far end bounced on the ground. so i moved to the middle and took              
a new grip. i hefted it and carried it back.                                      
i set it against a steep area of the rise a bit in advance of luke’s position     
and i mounted quickly. i began drawing it up behind me then.                      
“okay, where’d you get the ladder?” he asked.                                     
“found it,” i said.                                                               
“looks like wet paint on the side there.”                                         
“maybe someone lost it just recently.”                                            
i began lowering it into the opening. several feet protruded after it             
reached the bottom. i adjusted it for stability.                                  
“i’ll start down first,” i said, “and stay right under you.”                      
“take my stick and my blade down first, will you?”                                
“sure.”                                                                           
i did that thing. by the time i climbed back he had caught hold and               
gotten onto it, had begun his descent.                                            
“you’ll have to teach me that trick one of these days,” he said, breathing        
heavily.                                                                          
“don’t know what you’re talking about,” i answered.                               
he descended slowly, pausing to rest at each rung, and he was flushed             
and panting when he reached the bottom. he slumped to the floor                   
immediately, pressing his right palm against his lower rib cage. after a          
time, he inched backward a bit and rested against the wall.                       
“you okay?” i asked.                                                              
he nodded. “will be,” he said, “in a few minutes. being stabbed takes a           
lot out of you.”                                                                  
“want a blanket?”                                                                 
“no, thanks.”                                                                     
“well, you rest here and i’ll go check the larder and see whether                 
anything’s gotten at the supplies. want me to bring you anything?”                
“some water,” he said.                                                            
the supplies proved to be in good order, and the sleeping bag was still           
where i’d left it. i returned with a drink for luke and a few ironic memories     
of the occasion when he’d done the same for me.                                   
“looks as if you’re in business,” i told him. “there’s still plenty of            
stuff.”                                                                           
“you didn’t drink all the wine, did you?” he asked between sips.                  
“no.”                                                                             
“good.”                                                                           
“now, you said you have a piece of information vital to the interests of          
amber,” i said. “care to tell me about it?”                                       
he smiled. “not yet,” he said.                                                    
“i thought that was our deal.”                                                    
“you didn’t hear the whole thing. we were interrupted.”                           
i shook my head. but, “all right, we were interrupted,” i acknowledged.           
“tell me the rest.”                                                               
“i’ve got to get back on my feet, so i can take the keep and free my              
mother…”                                                                          
i nodded.                                                                         
“the information is yours after we rescue her.”                                   
“hey! wait a minute! you’re asking a hell of a lot!”                              
“not for what i’m paying.”                                                        
“sounds like i’m buying a pig in a poke.”                                         
“yes, i guess you are. but believe me, it’ll be worth knowing.”                   
“what if it becomes worth knowing while i’m waiting?”                             
“no, i’ve figured the timing on this. my recovery is only going to take a         
couple of days, amber time. i can’t see the matter coming up that fast.”          
“luke, this is starting to sound like some sort of trick.”                        
“it is,” he said, “but it will benefit amber as well as myself.”                  
“that’s another thing. i can’t see you giving something like this away to         
the enemy.”                                                                       
he sighed. “it might even be enough to get me off the hook,” he added.            
“you’re thinking of calling off your feud?”                                       
“i don’t know. but i’ve been doing a lot of thinking, and if i did decide         
to go that route it would make for a real good opener.”                           
“and if you decided not to, you’d be screwing yourself. wouldn’t you?”            
“i could live with it, though. it might make my job harder, but not               
impossible.”                                                                      
“i don’t know,” i said. “if word of this gets out and i’ve got nothing to         
show for letting you get away like this, i’ll be in real hot water.”              
“i won’t tell anybody if you won’t.”                                              
“there’s vinta.”                                                                  
“and she keeps insisting that her big aim in life is to protect you.              
besides, she won’t be there if you go back. or rather, there will be the real     
vinta, having awakened as from a troubled sleep.”                                 
“how can you be so sure?”                                                         
“because you’ve left. she’s probably already off seeking you.”                    
“do you know what she really is?”                                                 
“no, but i’ll help you speculate sometime.”                                       
“not now?”                                                                        
“no, i’ve got to sleep some more. it’s catching up with me again.”                
“then let’s go over this deal one more time. what are you going to do,            
how do you intend to do it and what are you promising me?”                        
he yawned. “i stay here till i’m back in shape,” he said. “then when              
i’m ready to attack the keep i get in touch with you. which reminds me,           
you still have my trumps.”                                                        
“i know. keep talking. how do you intend taking the keep?”                        
“i’m working on it. i’ll let you know that too. anyhow, you can help us           
or not at that point, as you see fit. i wouldn’t mind having another sorcerer     
with me, though. once we’re in and she’s freed, i’ll tell you what i              
promised and you can take it back to amber.”                                      
“what if you lose?” i asked.                                                      
he looked away. “i guess there’s always that possibility,” he finally             
agreed. “okay, how’s this? i’ll write the whole thing out and keep it with        
me. i’ll give it to you—by trump or in person—before we attack. win or            
lose, i’ll have paid my way with you.”                                            
he extended his good hand and i clasped it.                                       
“okay,” i said.                                                                   
“then let me have my trumps back, and i’ll be talking to you as soon              
as i get moving again.”                                                           
i hesitated. finally, i drew out my pack, which was now grown quite               
thick. i shuffled out my own then along with a number of his and passed           
him what remained.                                                                
“what about the rest?”                                                            
“i want to study them, luke. okay?”                                               
he shrugged weakly. “i can always make more. but give me back my                  
mother’s.”                                                                        
“here.”                                                                           
he accepted it, then said, “i don’t know what you’ve got in mind, but             
i’ll give you a piece of advice: don’t screw around with dalt. he’s not the       
nicest of guys when he’s normal, and i think there’s something wrong with         
him right now. keep away from him.”                                               
i nodded, then got to my feet.                                                    
“you’re going now?” he asked.                                                     
“right.”                                                                          
“leave me the ladder.”                                                            
“it’s all yours.”                                                                 
“what are you going to tell them back in amber?”                                  
“nothing—yet,” i said. “hey, you want me to bring some food up here               
before i go? save you a trip.”                                                    
“yeah. good idea. bring me a bottle of wine, too.”                                
i went back and got him a load of provisions. i dragged in the sleeping           
bag also.                                                                         
i started up the ladder, then paused. “you don’t know your own mind on            
this yet,” i said, “do you?”                                                      
he smiled. “don’t be too sure of that.”                                           
when i got to the top i stared at the big boulder that had once sealed me         
in. earlier, i’d thought of returning the favor. i could keep track of the time,  
come get him when he was back on his feet. that way, he couldn’t pull a           
disappearing act on me. i had decided against it, though, not only because i      
was the only one who knew he was here and if something happened to me             
he’d be dead. mainly, it was because he wouldn’t be able to reach me with         
my trump when he was ready to move, if i kept him fully confined. that’s          
what i told myself, anyhow.                                                       
i stooped and caught hold of the boulder, anyway, and pushed it nearer            
the opening.                                                                      
“merle! what are you doing?”—from below.                                          
“looking for fishing bait,” i answered.                                           
“hey, come on! don’t…”                                                            
i laughed and pushed it a little nearer.                                          
“merle!”                                                                          
“thought you might want the door closed, in case it rains,” i said. “but          
it’s too damned heavy. forget it. take it easy.”                                  
i turned and jumped. i thought the extra adrenaline might do him some             
good.                                                                             
                                                                     
chapter 8                                                                         
when i hit the ground i kept going, back to the place from which i had            
conjured the ladder, out of sight from several directions.                        
i withdrew one of the blank cards. time was running.                              
when i fished out the pencil, i discovered that its point had broken. i           
unsheathed my blade, which was about the length of my arm. i’d found              
another use for the thing.                                                        
a minute or so later i had the card before me on a flat rock, and i was           
sketching my room back at the arbor house, the forces of the logrus               
moving through my hands. i had to work deliberately, getting the proper           
feeling of the place into the drawing. finally, when it was finished, i stood.    
it was right, it was ready. i opened my mind and regarded my work until it        
became reality. then i walked forward into the room. just as i did i thought      
of something i wanted to ask luke, but it was too late.                           
beyond the window, the shadows of the trees were stretching into the              
east. i had obviously been gone for most of the day.                              
when i turned i saw a sheet of paper upon the now made-up bed,                    
secured against breezes by the edge of a pillow. i crossed to it and picked it    
up, removing the small blue button which lay atop it before i did so.             
the writing was in english. it said:                                              
put the button in a safe place till you need it. i wouldn’t                       
carry it around too much. i hope you did the right thing. i guess                 
i’ll find out pretty soon. see you around.                                        
it was unsigned.                                                                  
safe or not, i couldn’t just leave it there. so i wrapped the button in the       
note and put it in my pocket. then i fetched my cloak from the closet and         
slung it over my arm.                                                             
i departed the room. the latch being broken, i left the door standing             
wide. i stopped in the hallway and listened, but i heard no voices, no sounds     
of movement.                                                                      
i made my way to the stairs and headed down. i was almost to the                  
bottom before i noticed her, so still did she sit, there beside the window to     
my right, a tray of bread and cheese, a bottle and a goblet on a small table at   
her side.                                                                         
“merlin!” she said suddenly, half rising. “the servants said you were             
here, but when i looked i couldn’t find you.”                                     
“i was called away,” i said, descending the final stair and advancing.            
“how are you feeling?”                                                            
“how do you—what do you know about me?” she asked.                                
“you probably don’t remember anything that happened during the past               
couple of days,” i replied.                                                       
“you are right,” she said. “won’t you sit down?”                                  
she gestured at the empty chair at the other side of the small table.             
“please join me.” she indicated the tray. “and let me get you some                
wine.”                                                                            
“that’s all right,” i said, seeing that she was drinking the white.               
she rose and crossed the room to a cabinet, opened it and took out                
another goblet. when she returned she poured a healthy slug of bayle’s piss       
into it and set it near my hand. i guessed it was possible they kept the good     
stuff for themselves.                                                             
“what can you tell me about my blackout?” she asked. “i’d been in                 
amber, and the next thing i knew i was back here and several days had             
gone by.”                                                                         
“yes,” i said, taking up a cracker and a bit of cheese. “about what time          
did you become yourself again?”                                                   
“this morning.”                                                                   
“it’s nothing to worry about—now,” i answered. “there shouldn’t be a              
recurrence.”                                                                      
“but what was it?”                                                                
“just something that’s been going around,” i said, trying the wine.               
“it seems more like magic than the flu.”                                          
“perhaps there was a touch of that too,” i agreed. “you never know                
what might blow in out of shadow. but almost everyone i know who’s had            
it is okay now.”                                                                  
she furrowed her brow. “it was very strange.”                                     
i had a few more crackers and sips of the wine. they did keep the good            
stuff for themselves.                                                             
“there is absolutely nothing to worry about,” i repeated.                         
she smiled and nodded. “i believe you. what are you doing here,                   
anyhow?”                                                                          
“stopover. i’m on my way back to amber,” i said, “from elsewhere.                 
which reminds me—may i borrow a horse?”                                           
“certainly,” she replied. “how soon will you be leaving?”                         
“as soon as i get the horse,” i said.                                             
she got to her feet. “i didn’t realize you were in a hurry. i’ll take you         
over to the stables now.”                                                         
“thanks.”                                                                         
i grabbed two more crackers and another piece of cheese on the way out            
and tossed off the rest of the wine. i wondered where the blue fog might be       
drifting now.                                                                     
when i’d located a good horse, which she told me i could have                     
delivered to their stable in amber, i saddled him and fitted his bridle. he       
was a gray, named smoke. i donned my cloak then and clasped vinta’s               
hands.                                                                            
“thanks for the hospitality,” i said, “even if you don’t recall it.”              
“don’t say good-bye yet,” she told me. “ride around to the kitchen door           
off the patio, and i’ll give you a water bottle and some food for the road.       
we didn’t have a mad affair that i don’t remember, did we?”                       
“a gentleman never tells,” i said.                                                
she laughed and slapped my shoulder. “come see me sometime when                   
i’m in amber,” she told me, “and refresh my memory.”                              
i grabbed a set of saddlebags, a bag of chow for smoke and a longish              
tethering rope. i led him outside as vinta headed back to the house. i            
mounted then and rode slowly after her, a few dogs capering about me. i           
circled the manor, taking the long way around, drew rein and dismounted           
near the kitchen. i considered the patio, wishing i had one just like it where    
i could sit and take coffee in the morning. or had it just been the company?      
after a time, the door opened and vinta came out and passed me a                  
bundle and a flask. as i was securing them, she said, “let my father know         
that i’ll be back in a few days, will you? tell him that i came to the country    
because i wasn’t feeling well, but that i’m all right now.”                       
“glad to,” i said.                                                                
“i don’t really know why you were here,” she said. “but if it involves            
politics or intrigue i don’t want to know.”                                       
“okay,” i said.                                                                   
“if a servant took a meal to a big red-haired man who seemed to be                
pretty badly injured, this would be better forgotten?”                            
“i’d say.”                                                                        
“it will be, then. but one of these days i’d like the story.”                     
“me too,” i said. “we’ll see what we can do.”                                     
“so, have a good journey.”                                                        
“thanks. i’ll try.”                                                               
i clasped her hand, turned away and mounted.                                      
“so long.”                                                                        
“see you in amber,” she said.                                                     
i mounted and continued my circuit of the house until i was back near             
the stables again. i headed past them then to a trail we had ridden that led      
off in the direction i wanted. back toward the house, a dog began to howl         
and another joined it moments later. there was a breeze out of the south,         
and it carried a few leaves past me. i wanted to be on the road, far away and     
alone. i value my solitude because that is when i seem to do my best              
thinking, and right now i had many things to think over.                          
i rode to the northwest. about ten minutes later i came to a dirt road we         
had crossed the other day. this time i followed it westward, and it finally       
took me to the crossroads with the marker indicating that amber lay               
straight ahead. i rode on.                                                        
it was a yellow dirt road that i traveled, showing the impress of many            
wagon wheels. it followed the contours of the land, passing between fallow        
fields bordered by low stone fences, a few trees at either hand. i could see      
the stark outlines of mountains far ahead, standing above the forested area i     
was soon to encounter. we moved along at an easy gait, and i let my mind          
drift over the events of the past few days.                                       
that i had an enemy i did not doubt. luke had assured me that it was no           
longer him, and i had found him to be more than a little persuasive. he need      
not have come to me to be patched up, as both he and vinta had pointed            
out. and he could have found his own way to the crystal cave or some other        
sanctuary. and the business about my helping him to rescue jasra could            
have waited. i was more than half convinced that he was trying to get back        
on better terms with me again quickly because i was his only contact with         
the court of amber, and his fortunes had taken a turn for the worse. i had a      
feeling that what he really wanted was an official determination as to his        
status with amber, and that he had mentioned the piece of important               
information he would be willing to surrender both as a sign of good faith         
and as a bargaining chip. i was not at all certain that i, personally, would be   
very crucial to any plan he might have for rescuing jasra. not when he            
knew the keep inside and out, was some kind of sorcerer himself and had a         
band of mercs he could transport from the shadow earth. for all i knew,           
that fancy ammo of his would work there as well as in amber. and whether          
that was true or not, why couldn’t he just trump his attack force into the        
place? he wouldn’t even really have to win a battle—just get in, grab jasra       
and get out. no, i did not feel that i was really necessary to whatever           
operation he finally decided upon. i’d a feeling he’d waved a red herring at      
me, hoping that when the air cleared we would simply consider what he had         
and what he wanted and make him an offer.                                         
i’d a feeling, too, that he might be willing to call it quits on the vendetta     
now that caine was out of the way and family honor satisfied. and i’d a           
notion that jasra was the stumbling block on his side. while i’d no idea          
what hold she might have over him, it had occurred to me that the piece of        
information to which he’d referred might represent some means of                  
neutralizing her. if he got it to us quietly and it seemed to come from our       
side, he could save face with her as well as buying peace with us.                
tantalizing. my problem now was to find the best way to present this at           
court without looking like a traitor for having let him go. which meant i         
had to show that the profit would be worth the investment.                        
there were more trees at the roadside now, and the forest itself was              
nearer. i crossed a wooden bridge above a clear stream, and the gentle            
splashing sounds followed me for a time. there were brown fields and              
distant hams to my left, a wagon with a broken axle off to my right…              
and if i had read luke wrong? was there some way i might be able to               
pressure him and make my interpretation come out right anyway? a small            
idea began to form. i was not overjoyed with it, but i considered it              
nevertheless. risk and speed were what it involved. it had its merits,            
though. i pushed it as far as i could, then put it aside and returned to my       
original train of thought.                                                        
somewhere, there was an enemy. and if it wasn’t luke, who was it?                 
jasra seemed the most obvious candidate. she had made her feelings                
toward me pretty clear on the occasions of our two meetings. she could            
well be the one who had dispatched the assassins i had encountered in             
death alley. in that case, i was probably safe for a time—with her a              
prisoner back at the keep—unless, of course, she had sent along a few more        
before she had been captured. that would have been redundant, though.             
why waste all that manpower on me? i had only been a minor figure in the          
event she sought to avenge, and the men who came after me had been                
almost sufficient for the task.                                                   
and if it wasn’t jasra? then i was still in jeopardy. the wizard in the           
blue mask, whom i assumed to be sharu garrul, had caused me to be                 
pursued by a tornado, which seemed a far less friendly overture than the          
flowers that had followed. this latter, of course, identified him with the        
individual behind my peculiar experience at flora’s apartment back in san         
francisco. in that instance, he had initiated the encounter, which meant that     
he had some designs on me. what was it he’d said? something about the             
possibility of us being at cross-purposes at some future time. how                
interesting, in retrospect. for i could now see the possibility of such a         
situation’s occurring.                                                            
but was it really sharu garrul who had sent the assassins? despite his            
familiarity with the power of the blue stone that had guided them—as              
evidenced by the blue button in my pocket—it didn’t seem to follow. for           
one thing, our purposes were not yet crossed. for another, it did not seem        
the proper style for a cryptic, flower-throwing master of elements. i could       
be dead wrong there, of course, but i expected something more in the nature       
of a sorcerous duel with that one.                                                
the fields gave way to wilderness as i approached the verge of the                
forest. something of twilight had already entered its bright-leafed domain.       
it did not seem a dense, ancient wood like arden, however; from the               
distance i had seen numerous gaps within its higher reaches. the road             
continued wide and well-kept. i drew my cloak more fully about me as i            
entered the shadowed coolness. it seemed an easy ride, if it were all to be       
like this. and i was in no hurry i had too many thoughts that wanted              
thinking…                                                                         
if only i had been able to learn more from that strange, nameless entity          
who had, for a time, controlled vinta. what her true nature might be, i still     
had no idea. “her,” yes. i somehow felt the entity to be more feminine than       
masculine in nature, despite its having controlled george hansen and dan          
martinez. perhaps this was only because i had made love to her as meg             
devlin. difficult to say. but i had known gail for some time, and the lady        
in the lake had seemed a real lady…                                               
enough. i’d decided on my pronoun. other matters of greater                       
importance were involved. like, whatever she was, why was she following           
me about insisting that she wanted to protect me? while i appreciated the         
sentiment, i still had no insight into her motivation.                            
but there was something far more important to me than her motivation.             
why she saw fit to guard me could remain her own business. the big                
question was: against what did she feel i needed protection? she must have        
had a definite threat in mind, and she had not given me the slightest hint as     
to what it was.                                                                   
was this, then, the enemy? the real enemy? vinta’s adversary?                     
i tried reviewing everything i knew or had guessed about her.                     
there is a strange creature who sometimes takes the form of a small               
blue mist. she is capable of finding her way to me through shadow. she            
possesses the power to take control of a human body, completely                   
suppressing its natural ego. she hung around in my vicinity for a number of       
years without my becoming aware of her. her earliest incarnation that i           
know of was as luke’s former girlfriend, gail.                                    
why gail? if she were guarding me, why go around with luke? why                   
not become one of the women i’d dated? why not be julia? but no. she had          
decided upon gail. was that because luke was the threat, and she’d wanted         
to keep a close watch on him? but she’d actually let luke get away with a         
few attempts on my life. and then jasra. she’d admitted that she’d known          
jasra was behind the later ones. why hadn’t she simply removed them? she          
could have taken over luke’s body, stepped in front of a speeding car,            
drifted away from the remains, then gone and done the same with jasra. she        
wasn’t afraid to die in a host body. i’d seen her do it twice.                    
unless she’d somehow known that all their attempts on my life would               
fail. could she have sabotaged the letter bomb? could she, in some way,           
have been behind my premonition on the morning of the opened gas jets?            
and perhaps something else with each of the others? still, it would seem a        
lot simpler to go to the source and remove the problem itself. i knew that        
she had no compunction about killing. she’d ordered the slaying of my final       
assailant in death alley.                                                         
what, then?                                                                       
two possibilities came to mind immediately. one was that she’d                    
actually come to like luke and that she’d simply found ways to neutralize         
him without destroying him. but then i thought of her as martinez, and it         
fell apart. she’d actually been shooting that night in santa fe. okay. then       
there was the other possibility: luke was not the real threat, and she’d liked    
him enough to let him go on living once he’d quit the april 30 games and          
she saw that we’d gotten friendly. something happened in new mexico that          
made her change her mind. as to what it was, i had no idea. she had               
followed me to new york, then, and been george hansen and meg devlin              
in quick succession. luke was, by that time, out of the picture, following        
his disappearing act on the mountain. he no longer represented a threat, yet      
she was almost frantic in her efforts to get in touch with me. was something      
else impending? the real threat?                                                  
i racked my brains, but i could not figure what that threat might have            
been. was i following a completely false trail with this line of reasoning?       
she certainly was not omniscient. her reason for spiriting me to arbor            
house was as much to pump me for information as it was to remove me               
from the scene of the attack. and some of the things she’d wanted to know         
were as interesting as some of the things she knew.                               
my mind did a backward flip. what was the first question she had asked            
me?                                                                               
landing adroitly on my mental feet, back at bill roth’s place, i heard            
the question several times. as george hansen she had asked it casually and        
i had lied; as a voice on the telephone she had asked it and been denied; as      
meg devlin, in bed, she had finally gotten me to answer it honestly: what         
was your mother’s name?                                                           
when i’d told her that my mother was named dara she had finally                   
begun speaking freely. she had warned me against luke. it seemed that she         
might have been willing to tell me more then, too, save that the arrival of       
the real meg’s husband had cut short our conversation.                            
to what was this the key? it placed my origin in the courts of chaos, to          
which she had at no time referred. yet it had to be important, somehow.           
i had a feeling that i already had the answer but that i would be unable          
to realize it until i had formulated the proper question.                         
enough. i could go no further. knowing that she was aware of my                   
connection with the courts still told me nothing. she was also obviously          
aware of my connection with amber, and i could not see how that figured           
in the pattern of events either.                                                  
so i would leave it at that point and come back to it later. i had plenty of      
other things to think about. at least, i now had lots of new questions to ask     
her the next time we met, and i was certain that we would meet again.             
then something else occurred to me. if she’d done any real protecting             
of me at all, it had taken place offstage. she had given me a lot of              
information, which i thought was probably correct but which i had had no          
opportunity to verify. from her phoning and lurking back in new york to           
her killing of my one possible source of information in death alley, she had      
really been more a bother than a help. it was conceivable that she could          
actually show up and encumber me with aid again, at exactly the wrong             
moment.                                                                           
so instead of working on my opening argument for random, i spent the              
next hour or so considering the nature of a being capable of moving into a        
person and taking over the controls. there seemed only a certain number of        
ways it might be done, and i narrowed the field quickly, considering what i       
knew of her nature, by means of the technical exercises my uncle had              
taught me. when i thought i had it worked out i backtracked and mused             
over the forces that would have to be involved.                                   
from the forces i worked my way through the tonic vibrations of their             
aspects. the use of raw power, while flashy, is wasteful and very fatiguing       
for the operator, not to mention aesthetically barbaric. better to be prepared.   
i lined up the spoken signatures and edited them into a spell. suhuy              
would probably have gotten it down even shorter, but there is a point of          
diminishing returns on these things, and i had mine figured to where it           
should work if my main guesses were correct. so i collated it and                 
assembled it. it was fairly long—too long to rattle off in its entirety if i were 
in the hurry i probably would be. studying it, i saw that three linchpins         
would probably hold it, though four would be better.                              
i summoned the logrus and extended my tongue into its moving                      
pattern. then i spoke the spell, slowly and clearly, leaving out the four key     
words i had chosen to omit. the woods grew absolutely still about me as           
the words rang out. the spell hung before me like a crippled butterfly of         
sound and color, trapped within the synesthetic web of my personal vision         
of the logrus, to come again when i summoned it, to be released when i            
uttered the four omitted words.                                                   
i banished the vision and felt my tongue relax. now she was not the               
only one capable of troublesome surprises.                                        
i halted for a drink of water. the sky had grown darker and the small             
noises of the forest returned. i wondered whether fiona or bleys had been         
in touch, and how bill was doing back in town. i listened to the rattling of      
branches. suddenly, i had the feeling i was being watched—not the cold            
scrutiny of a trump touch, but simply the sensation that there was a pair of      
eyes fixed upon me. i shivered. all those thoughts about enemies…                 
i loosened my blade and rode on. the night was young, and there were              
more miles ahead than behind.                                                     
riding through the evening i kept alert, but i neither heard nor saw              
anything untoward. had i been wrong about jasra, sharu or even luke?              
and was there a party of assassins at my back right now? periodically, i          
drew rein and sat listening for a short while. but i heard nothing unusual on     
these occasions, nothing that could be taken as sounds of pursuit. i became       
acutely aware of the blue button in my pocket. was it acting as a beacon for      
some sinister sending of the wizard’s? i was loath to get rid of the thing        
because i could foresee a number of possible uses for it. besides, if it had      
already attuned me—which it probably had—i could see no benefit in                
disposing of it now. i would secrete it someplace safe before i made my           
attempt to lose its vibes. until such a time, i could see no percentage in        
doing anything else with it.                                                      
the sky continued to darken, and a number of stars had put in hesitant            
appearances. smoke and i slowed even more in our course, but the road             
remained good and its pale surface stayed sufficiently visible to present no      
hazard. i heard the call of an owl from off to the right and moments later        
saw its dark shape rush at middle height among the trees. it would have           
been a pleasant night to be riding if i were not creating my own ghosts and       
haunting myself with them. i love the smells of autumn and the forest, and i      
resolved to burn a few leaves in my campfire later on for that pungency           
unlike any other i know.                                                          
the air was clean and cool. hoof sounds, our breathing and the wind               
seemed to be the only noises in the neighborhood until we flushed a deer a        
bit later and heard the diminishing crashes of its retreat for some time          
afterward. we crossed a small but sturdy wooden bridge a little later, but no     
trolls were taking tolls. the road took a turn upward, and we wound our           
way slowly but steadily to a higher elevation. now there were numerous            
stars visible through the weave of the branches, but no clouds that i could       
see. the deciduous trees grew barer as we gained a bit of altitude, and more      
evergreens began to occur. i felt the breezes more strongly now.                  
i began pausing more frequently, to rest smoke, to listen, to nibble at           
my supplies. i resolved to keep going at least until moonrise—which i tried       
to calculate from its occurrence the other night, following my departure          
from amber. if i made it to that point before i camped, the rest of the ride      
into amber tomorrow morning would be pretty easy.                                 
frakir pulsed once, lightly, upon my wrist. but hell, that had often              
happened in traffic when i’d cut someone off. a hungry fox could have just        
passed, regarded me and wished itself a bear. still, i waited there longer        
than i had intended, prepared for an attack and trying not to appear so.          
but nothing happened, the warning was not repeated and after a time i             
rode on. i returned to my idea for putting the screws to luke—and, for that       
matter, jasra. i couldn’t call it a plan yet, because it was lacking in almost    
all particulars. the more i thought of it, the crazier it seemed. for one thing,  
it was extremely tempting, as it held the potential for resolving a lot of        
problems. i wondered then why i had never created a trump for bill roth. i        
felt a sudden need to talk to a good attorney. i might well want someone to       
argue my case before this was done. too dark now to do any drawing,               
though… and not really necessary yet. actually, i just wanted to talk with        
him, bring him up to date, get the views of someone not directly involved.        
frakir issued no further warnings during the next hour. we commenced              
a slightly downward course then, soon passing into a somewhat more                
sheltered area where the smell of pines came heavy. i mused on—about              
wizards and flowers, ghostwheel and his problems, and the name of the             
entity who had recently occupied vinta. there were lots of other musings,         
too, some of which went a long way back…                                          
many stops later, with a bit of moonlight trickling through the branches          
behind me, i decided to call it quits and look for a place to bed down. i gave    
smoke a brief drink at the next stream. about a quarter hour afterward, i         
thought i glimpsed what might be a promising spot off to the right, so i left     
the road and headed that way.                                                     
it turned out not to be as good a place as i’d thought, and i continued           
farther into the wood until i came across a small clear area that seemed          
adequate. i dismounted, unsaddled smoke and tethered him, rubbed him              
down with his blanket and gave him something to eat. then i scraped clear         
a small area of ground with my blade, dug a pit at its center and built a fire    
there. i used a spell to ignite it because i was feeling lazy, and i threw on     
several clumps of leaves as i recalled my earlier reflections.                    
i seated myself on my cloak, my back against the bole of a middle-sized           
tree, and ate a cheese sandwich and sipped water while i worked up the            
ambition to pull my boots off. my blade lay upon the ground at my side.           
my muscles began to unkink. the smell of the fire was a nostalgic                 
thing. i toasted my next sandwich over it.                                        
i sat and thought of nothing for a long while. gradually, in barely               
perceptible stages, i felt the gentle disengagements lassitude brings to the      
extremities. i had meant to gather firewood before i took my ease. but i          
didn’t really need it. it wasn’t all that cold. i’d wanted the fire mainly for    
company.                                                                          
however… i dragged myself to my feet and moved off into the woods. i              
did a long, slow reconnaissance about the area once i got moving. though          
to be honest, my main reason for getting up had been to go and relieve            
myself. i halted in my circuit when i thought that i detected a small flicker     
of light far off to the northeast. another campfire? moonlight on water? a        
torch? there had been only a glimpse and i could not locate it again, though      
i moved my head about, retraced my most recent few paces and even struck          
off a small distance in that direction.                                           
but i did not wish to chase after some will-o’-the-wisp and spend my              
night beating the bushes. i checked various lines of sight back to my camp.       
my small fire was barely visible even from this distance. i circled my camp,      
entered and sprawled again. the fire was already dying and i decided to let       
it burn out. i wrapped my cloak about me and listened to the soft sounds of       
the wind.                                                                         
i fell asleep quickly. for how long i slept, i do not know. there were no         
dreams that i can recall.                                                         
i was awakened by frakir’s frantic pulsing. i opened my eyes the barest           
slits and tossed, as if in sleep, so that my right hand fell near the haft of my  
blade. i maintained my slow breathing pattern. i heard and felt that the wind     
had risen, and i saw that it had fanned the embers to the point where my fire     
flared once again. i saw no one before me, however. i strained my hearing         
after any sounds, but all i heard was the wind and the popping of the fire.       
it seemed as foolish to spring to my feet into a guard position when i            
did not know from which direction the danger was approaching as it did to         
remain a target. on the other hand, i had intentionally cast my cloak so that     
i lay with a large, low-limbed pine at my back. it would have been very           
difficult for someone to have approached me from the rear, let alone to have      
done so quietly. so it did not seem i was in danger of an imminent attack         
from that direction.                                                              
i turned my head slightly and studied smoke, who had begun to seem a              
little uneasy. frakir continued her now distracting warning till i willed her     
to be still.                                                                      
smoke was twitching his ears and moving his head about, nostrils                  
dilated. as i watched, i saw that his attention seemed directed toward my         
right. he began edging his way across the camp, his long tether snaking           
behind him.                                                                       
i heard a sound then, beyond the noise of smoke’s retreat, as of                  
something advancing from the right. it was not repeated for a time, and then      
i heard it again. it was not a footfall, but a sound as of a body brushing        
against a branch which suddenly issued a weak protest.                            
i visualized the disposition of trees and shrubs in that direction and            
decided to let the lurker draw nearer before i made my move. i dismissed          
the notion of summoning the logrus and preparing a magical attack. it             
would take a bit more time than i thought i had remaining. also, from             
smoke’s behavior and from what i had heard, it seemed that there was only         
a single individual approaching. i resolved, though, to lay in a decent           
supply of spells the first chance i got, both offensive and defensive, on the     
order of the one i had primed against my guardian entity. the trouble is that     
it can take several days of solitude to work a really decent array of them out    
properly, enact them and rehearse their releases to the point where you can       
spring them at a moment’s notice—and then they have a tendency to start           
decaying after a week or so. sometimes they last longer and sometimes less        
long, depending both on the amount of energy you’re willing to invest in          
them and on the magical climate of the particular shadow in which you’re          
functioning. it’s a lot of bother unless you’re sure you’re going to need         
them within a certain period of time. on the other hand, a good sorcerer          
should have one attack, one defense and one escape spell hanging around at        
all times. but i’m generally somewhat lazy, not to mention pretty                 
easygoing, and i didn’t see any need for that sort of setup until recently.       
and recently, i hadn’t had much time to be about it.                              
so any use i might make of the logrus now, were i to summon it and                
situate myself within its ambit, would pretty much amount to blasting away        
with raw power—which is very draining on the operator.                            
let him come a little nearer, that’s all, and it would be cold steel and a        
strangling cord that he would face.                                               
i could feel the presence advancing now, hear the soft stirring of pine           
needles. a few more feet, enemy… come on. that’s all i need. come into            
range…                                                                            
he halted. i could hear a steady, soft breathing.                                 
then, “you must be aware of me by now, magus,” came a low whisper,                
“for we all have our little tricks, and i know the source of yours.”              
“who are you?” i asked, as i clasped the haft of my blade and rolled              
into a crouch, facing the darkness, the point of my weapon describing a           
small circle.                                                                     
“i am the enemy,” was the reply. “the one you thought would never                 
come.”                                                                            
                                                                     
chapter 9                                                                         
power.                                                                            
i remembered the day i had stood atop a rocky prominence. fiona—                  
dressed in lavender, belted with silver—stood in a higher place before me         
and somewhat to my right. she held a silver mirror in her right hand, and         
she looked downward through the haze to the place where the great tree            
towered. there was a total stillness about us, and even our own small             
sounds came muffled. the upper portions of the tree disappeared into a            
low-hanging fog bank. the light that filtered through limned it starkly           
against another pile of fog which hung at its back, rising to join with the       
one overhead. a bright, seemingly self-illuminated line was etched into the       
ground near the base of the tree, curving off to vanish within the fog. far to    
my left, a brief arc of a similar intensity was also visible, emerging from       
and returning to the billowing white wall.                                        
“what is it, fiona?” i asked. “why did you bring me to this place?”               
“you’ve heard of it,” she replied. “i wanted you to see it.”                      
i shook my head. “i’ve never heard of it. i’ve no idea what i’m looking           
at.”                                                                              
“come,” she said, and she began to descend.                                       
she disdained my hand, moving quickly and gracefully, and we came                 
down from the rocks and moved nearer to the tree. there was something             
vaguely familiar there, but i could not place it.                                 
“from your father,” she said at last. “he spent a long time telling you           
his story. surely he did not omit this part.”                                     
i halted as understanding presented itself, tentatively at first.                 
“that tree,” i said.                                                              
“corwin planted his staff when he commenced the creation of the new               
pattern,” she said. “it was fresh. it took root.”                                 
i seemed to feel a faint vibration in the ground.                                 
fiona turned her back on the prospect, raised the mirror she carried and          
angled it so that she regarded the scene over her right shoulder.                 
“yes,” she said, after several moments. then she extended the mirror to           
me. “take a look,” she told me, “as i just did.”                                  
i accepted it, held it, adjusted it and stared.                                   
the view in the mirror was not the same as that which had presented               
itself to my unaided scrutiny. i was able to see beyond the tree now, through     
the fog, to discern most of the strange pattern which twisted its bright way      
about the ground, working its passages inward to its off-center terminus, the     
only spot still concealed by an unmoving tower of white, within which tiny        
lights like stars seemed to burn.                                                 
“it doesn’t look like the pattern back in amber,” i said.                         
“no,” she answered. “is it anything like the logrus?”                             
“not really. the logrus actually alters itself somewhat, constantly. still,       
it’s more angular, whereas this is mostly curves and bends.”                      
i studied it a little longer, then returned her looking glass.                    
“interesting spell on the mirror,” i commented, for i had been studying           
this also, while i held it.                                                       
“and much more difficult than you’d think,” she responded, “for there’s           
more than fog in there. watch.”                                                   
she advanced to the beginning of the pattern, near the great tree, where          
she moved as if to set her foot upon the bright trail. before it arrived,         
however, a small electrical discharge crackled upward and made contact            
with her shoe. she jerked her foot back quickly.                                  
“it rejects me,” she said. “i can’t set foot on it. try it.”                      
there was something in her gaze i did not like, but i moved forward to            
where she had been standing.                                                      
“why couldn’t your mirror penetrate all the way to the center of the              
thing?” i asked suddenly.                                                         
“the resistance seems to go up the farther you go in. it is greatest              
there,” she replied. “but as to why, i do not know.”                              
i hesitated a moment longer. “has anyone tried it other than yourself?”           
‘i brought bleys here,’ she answered.”it rejected him too.”                       
“and he’s the only other one who’s seen it?”                                      
“no, i brought random. but he declined to try. said he didn’t care to             
screw around with it right then.”                                                 
“prudent, perhaps. was he wearing the jewel at the time?”                         
“no. why?”                                                                        
“just curious.”                                                                   
“see what it does for you.”                                                       
“all right.”                                                                      
i raised my right foot and lowered it slowly toward the line. about a             
foot above it, i stopped.                                                         
“something seems to be holding me back,” i said.                                  
“strange. there is no electrical discharge for you.”                              
“small blessing,” i responded, and i pushed my foot a couple of inches            
farther downward. finally, i sighed. “nope, fi. i can’t.”                         
i read the disappointment in her features.                                        
“i was hoping,” she said as i drew back, “that someone other than                 
corwin might be able to walk it. his son seemed the most likely choice.”          
“why is it so important that someone walk it? just because it’s there?”           
“i think it’s a menace,” she said. “it has to be explored and dealt with.”        
“a menace? why?”                                                                  
“amber and chaos are the two poles of existence, as we understand it,”            
she said, “housing as they do the pattern and the logrus. for ages there has      
been something of an equilibrium between them. now, i believe, this               
bastard pattern of your father’s is undermining their balance.”                   
“in what fashion?”                                                                
“there have always been wavelike exchanges between amber and                      
chaos. this seems to be setting up some interference.”                            
“it sounds more like tossing an extra ice cube into a drink,” i said. “it         
should settle down after a while.”                                                
she shook her head. “things are not settling. there have been far more            
shadow-storms since this thing was created. they rend the fabric of               
shadow. they affect the nature of reality itself.”                                
“no good,” i said. “another event a lot more important along these                
lines occurred at the same time. the original pattern in amber was                
damaged and oberon repaired it. the wave of chaos which came out of               
that swept through all of shadow. everything was affected. but the pattern        
held and things settled again. i’d be more inclined to think of all those extra   
shadow-storms as being in the nature of aftershocks.”                             
“it’s a good argument,” she said. “but what if it’s wrong?”                       
“i don’t think it is.”                                                            
“merle, there’s some kind of power here—an immense amount of                      
power.”                                                                           
“i don’t doubt it.”                                                               
“it has always been our way to keep an eye on power, to try to                    
understand it, to control it. because one day it might become a threat. did       
corwin tell you anything, anything at all, as to exactly what this represents     
and how we might get a handle on it?”                                             
“no,” i said. “nothing beyond the fact that he made it in a hurry to              
replace the old one, which he’d figured oberon might not have succeeded           
in repairing.”                                                                    
“if only we could find him.”                                                      
“there still hasn’t been any word?”                                               
“droppa claims that he saw him at the sands, back on the shadow earth             
you both favor. he said he was in the company of an attractive woman, and         
they were both having a drink and listening to a music group. he waved and        
headed toward them through a crowd, and he thought that corwin saw him.           
when he got to their table, though, they were gone.”                              
“that’s all?”                                                                     
“that’s all.”                                                                     
“that’s not much.”                                                                
“i know. if he’s the only one who can walk this damned thing, though,             
and if it is a menace, we could be in big trouble one day.”                       
“i think you’re being an alarmist, aunty.”                                        
“i hope you’re right, merle. come on, i’ll take you home.”                        
i studied the place once more, for details as well as feeling, because i          
wanted to be able to construct a trump for it. i never told anyone that there     
had been no resistance as i had lowered my foot, because once you set foot        
into the pattern or the logrus there is no turning back. you either proceed to    
the end or are destroyed by it. and as much as i love mysteries, my break         
was at its end and i had to get back to class.                                    
power.                                                                            
we were together in a wood within the black zone, that area of shadow             
with which chaos holds commerce. we were hunting zhind, which are                 
horned, short, black, fierce and carnivorous. i do not much like hunting          
because i do not much like killing things i don’t really have to. however, it     
was jurt’s idea, and since it was possibly also my last chance to work some       
reconciliation with my brother before i departed, i had decided to take him       
up on the offer. neither of us was that great an archer, and zhind are pretty     
fast. so with any luck at all nothing would get dead and we’d have some           
chance to talk and perhaps come away on better terms at the end of the            
hunt.                                                                             
on one occasion when we’d lost the trail and were resting, we talked for          
a long time about archery, court politics, shadow and the weather. he had         
been much more civil to me of late, which i took for a good sign. he’d let        
his hair grow in such a fashion as to cover the area of his missing left ear.     
ears are hard to regenerate. we did not speak of our duel, or of the              
argument that had led up to it. because i would soon be out of his life, i felt   
perhaps he wished to close this chapter of his existence in a relatively          
friendly fashion, with both of us going our ways with a memory we could           
feel good about. i was half right, anyway.                                        
later, when we had halted for a cold hail lunch, he asked me, “so, what           
does it feel like?”                                                               
“what?” i said.                                                                   
“the power,” he answered. “the logrus power—to walk in shadow, to                 
work with a higher order of magic than the mundane.”                              
i didn’t really want to go into detail, because i knew he’d prepared              
himself to traverse the logrus on three different occasions and had backed        
down at the last moment each time, when he’d looked into it. perhaps the          
skeletons of failures that suhuy keeps around had troubled him also. i don’t      
think jurt was aware that i knew about the last two times he’d changed his        
mind. so i decided to downplay my accomplishment.                                 
“oh, you don’t really feel any different,” i said, “until you’re actually         
using it. then it’s hard to describe.”                                            
“i’m thinking of doing it soon myself,” he said. “it would be good to             
see something of shadow, maybe even find a kingdom for myself                     
somewhere. can you give me any advice?”                                           
i nodded. “don’t look back,” i said. “don’t stop to think. just keep              
going.”                                                                           
he laughed. “sounds like orders to an army,” he said.                             
“i suppose there is a similarity.”                                                
he laughed again. “let’s go kill us a zhind,” he said.                            
that afternoon, we lost a trail in a thicket full of fallen branches. we’d        
heard the zhind crash through it, but it was not immediately apparent which       
way it had gone. i had my back to jurt and was facing the forward edge of         
the place, searching for some sign, when frakir constricted tightly about my      
wrist, then came loose and fell to the ground.                                    
i bent over to retrieve her, wondering what had happened, when i heard            
a thunk! from overhead. glancing upward, i saw an arrow protruding from           
the bole of the tree before me. its height above the ground was such that         
had i remained standing it would have entered my back.                            
i turned quickly toward jurt, not even straightening from my crouch. he           
was fitting another arrow to his bow.                                             
he said, “don’t look back. don’t stop to think. just keep going,” and he          
laughed.                                                                          
i dove toward him as he raised the weapon. a better archer would                  
probably have killed me. i think when i moved he panicked and released            
the arrow prematurely, though, because it caught in the side of my leather        
vest and i didn’t feel any pain.                                                  
i clipped him above the knees, and he dropped the bow as he fell over             
backward. he drew his hunting knife, rolled to the side and swung the             
weapon toward my throat. i caught his wrist with my left hand and was cast        
onto my back by the force of his momentum. i struck at his face with my           
right fist while holding the blade away from me. he blocked the punch and         
kneed me in the balls.                                                            
the point of the blade dropped to within inches of my throat as this              
blow collapsed a big piece of my resistance. still aching, i was able to turn     
my hip to prevent another ball-buster, simultaneous with casting my right         
forearm beneath his wrist and cutting my hand in the process. then i              
pushed with my right, pulled with my left and rolled to the left with the         
force of the turn. his arm was jerked free from my still-weakened grasp,          
and he rolled off to the side and i tried to recover—and then i heard him         
scream.                                                                           
coming up onto my knees, i saw that he lay upon his left side where he            
had come to a stop and the knife was several feet beyond him, caught in a         
tangle of broken branches. both hands were raised to his face, and his cries      
were wordless, animal-like bleats.                                                
i made my way over to him to see what had happened, with frakir held              
ready to wrap about his throat in case it were some sort of trick he was          
playing.                                                                          
but it was not. when i reached him i saw that a sharp limb of a fallen            
branch had pierced his right eye. there was blood on his cheek and the side       
of his nose.                                                                      
“stop jerking around!” i said. “you’ll make it worse. let me get it out.”         
“keep your damn hands off me!” he cried.                                          
then, clenching his teeth and grimacing horribly, he caught hold of the           
limb with his right hand and drew his head back. i had to look away. he           
made a whimpering noise several moments later and collapsed,                      
unconscious. i ripped off my left shirt sleeve, tore a strip from it, folded it   
into a pad and placed it over his damaged eye. with another strip, i tied it      
into place there. frakir found her way back about my wrist, as usual.             
then i dug out the trump that would take us home and raised him in                
my arms. mom wasn’t going to like this.                                           
power.                                                                            
it was a saturday. luke and i had been hang gliding all morning. then             
we met julia and gail for lunch, and afterward we took the starburst out          
and sailed all afternoon. later, we’d hit the bar and grill at the marina where   
i bought the beers while we waited for steaks, because luke had slammed           
my right arm flat against the tabletop when we’d wrist wrestled to see who        
paid for drinks.                                                                  
someone at the next table said, “if i had a million dollars, tax free,            
i’d…” and julia had laughed as she listened.                                      
“what’s funny?” i asked her.                                                      
“his wish list,” she said. “i’d want a closet full of designer dresses and        
some elegant jewelry to go with them. put the closet in a really nice house,      
and put the house someplace where i’d be important…”                              
luke smiled. “i detect a shift from money to power,” he said.                     
“maybe so,” she replied. “but what’s the difference, really?”                     
“money buys things,” luke said. “power makes things happen. if you                
ever have a choice, take the power.”                                              
gail’s usual faint smile had faded, and she wore a very serious                   
expression.                                                                       
“i don’t believe power should be an end in itself,” she said. “one has it         
only to use it in certain ways.”                                                  
julia laughed. “what’s wrong with a power trip?” she asked. “it sounds            
like fun to me.”                                                                  
“only till you run into a greater power,” luke said.                              
“then you have to think big,” julia answered.                                     
“that’s not right,” gail said. “one has duties and they come first.”              
luke was studying her now, and he nodded.                                         
“you can keep morality out of it,” julia said.                                    
“no, you can’t,” luke responded.                                                  
“i disagree,” she said.                                                           
luke shrugged.                                                                    
“she’s right,” gail said suddenly. “i don’t see that duty and morality are        
the same thing.”                                                                  
“well, if you’ve got a duty,” luke said, “something you absolutely must           
do—a matter of honor, say—then that becomes your morality.”                       
julia looked at luke, looked at gail. “does that mean we just agreed on           
something?” she asked.                                                            
“no,” luke said, “i don’t think so.”                                              
gail took a drink. “you’re talking about a personal code that need not            
have anything to do with conventional morality.”                                  
“right,” luke said.                                                               
“then it’s not really morality. you’re just talking duty,” she said.              
“you’re right on the duty,” luke answered. “but it’s still morality.”             
“morality is the values of a civilization,” she said.                             
“there is no such thing as civilization,” luke replied. “the word just            
means the art of living in cities.”                                               
“all right, then. of a culture,” she said.                                        
“cultural values are relative things,” luke said, smiling, “and mine say          
i’m right.”                                                                       
“where do yours come from?” gail asked, studying him carefully.                   
“let’s keep this pure and philosophical, huh?” he said.                           
“then maybe we should drop the term entirely,” gail said, “and just               
stick with duty.”                                                                 
“what happened to power?” julia asked.                                            
“it’s in there somewhere,” i said.                                                
suddenly gail looked perplexed, as if our discussion were not                     
something which had been repeated a thousand times in different forms, as         
if it had actually given rise to some new turn of thought.                        
“if they are two different things,” she said slowly, “which one is more           
important?                                                                        
“they’re not,” luke said. “they’re the same.”                                     
“i don’t think so,” julia told him. “but duties tend to be clear-cut, and it      
sounds as if you can choose your own morality. so if i had to have one i’d        
go with the morality.”                                                            
“i like things that are clear-cut,” gail said.                                    
luke chugged his beer, belched lightly. “shit!” he said. “philosophy              
class isn’t till tuesday. this is the weekend. who gets the next round,           
merle?”                                                                           
i placed my left elbow on the tabletop and opened my hand.                        
while we pushed together, the tension building and building between               
us, he said through clenched teeth, “i was right, wasn’t i?”                      
“you were right,” i said, just before i forced his arm all the way down.          
power.                                                                            
i removed my mail from the little locked box in the hallway and carried           
it upstairs to my apartment. there were two bills, some circulars and             
something thick and first class without a return address on it.                   
i closed the door behind me, pocketed my keys and dropped my                      
briefcase onto a nearby chair. i had started toward the sofa when the             
telephone in the kitchen rang.                                                    
tossing the mail toward the coffee table, i turned and started for the            
kitchen. the blast that occurred behind me might or might not have been           
strong enough to knock me over. i don’t know, because i dove forward of           
my own volition as soon as it occurred. i hit my head on the leg of the           
kitchen table. it dazed me somewhat, but i was otherwise undamaged. all           
the damage was in the other room. by the time i got to my feet the phone          
had stopped ringing.                                                              
i already knew there were lots of easier ways to dispose of junk mail,            
but i wondered for a long time afterward who it was that had been on the          
telephone.                                                                        
i sometimes remembered the first of the series, too, the truck that had           
come rushing toward me. i had only caught a glimpse of the driver’s face          
before i’d moved—inert, he was completely expressionless, as if he were           
dead, hypnotized, drugged or somehow possessed. choose any of the                 
above, i decided, and maybe more than one.                                        
and then there was the night of the muggers. they had attacked me                 
without a word. when it was all over and i was heading away, i had glanced        
back once. i thought i’d glimpsed a shadowy figure draw back into a               
doorway up the street—a smart precaution, i’d say, in light of what had           
been going on. but of course it could have been someone connected with            
the attack, too. i was torn. the person was too far off to have been able to      
give a good description of me. if i went back and it turned out to be an          
innocent bystander, there would then be a witness capable of identifying          
me. not that i didn’t think it was an open-and-shut case of self-defense, but     
there’d be a lot of hassle. so i said the hell with it, and i walked on.          
another interesting april 30.                                                     
the day of the rifle. there had been two shots as i’d hurried down the            
street. they’d both missed me before i’d realized what was going on,              
chipping brickbats from the side of the building to my left. there was no         
third shot, but there was a thud and a splintering sound from the building        
across the street. a third-floor window stood wide open.                          
i hurried over. it was an old apartment house and the front door was              
locked, but i didn’t slow down for niceties. i located the stair and mounted      
it. when i came to what i thought was the proper room, i decided to try the       
door the old-fashioned way and it worked. it was unlocked.                        
i stood to the side and pushed it open and saw that the place was                 
unfurnished and empty. unoccupied, too, it seemed. could i have been              
wrong? but then i saw that the window facing the street stood wide and i          
saw what lay upon the floor. i entered and closed the door behind me.             
a broken rifle lay in the corner. from markings on the stock i guessed            
that it had been swung with great force against a nearby radiator before it       
had been cast aside. then i saw something else on the floor, something wet        
and red. not much. just a few drops.                                              
i searched the place quickly. it was small. the one window in its single          
bedroom also stood open and i went to it. there was a fire escape beyond it,      
and i decided that it might be a good way for me to make my exit, too.            
there were a few more drops of blood on the black metal, but that was             
it. no one was in sight below, or in either direction.                            
power.                                                                            
to kill. to preserve. luke, jasra, gail. who was responsible for what?            
the more i thought of it, the more it seemed possible that there might            
have been a telephone call on the morning of the open gas jets, too. could        
that be what had roused me to an awareness of danger? each time i thought         
of these matters there seemed to be a slight shifting of emphasis. things         
stood in a different light. according to luke and the pseudo vinta, i was not     
in great danger in the later episodes, but it seemed that any of those things     
could have taken me out. who was i to blame? the perpetrator? or the              
savior who barely saved? and who was which? i remembered how my                   
father’s story had been complicated by that damned auto accident which            
played like last year at marienbad—though his had seemed simple                   
compared to everything that was coming down on me. at least he knew               
what he had to do most of the time. could i be the inheritor of a family          
curse involving complicated plotting?                                             
power.                                                                            
i remembered uncle suhuy’s final lesson. he had spent some time                   
following my completion of the logrus in teaching me things i could not           
have learned before then. there came a time when i thought i was finished.        
i had been confirmed in the art and dismissed. it seemed i had covered all        
the basics and anything more would be mere elaboration. i began making            
preparations for my journey to the shadow earth. then one morning suhuy           
sent for me. i assumed that he just wanted to say good-bye and give me a          
few friendly words of advice.                                                     
his hair is white, he is somewhat stooped and there are days when he              
carries a staff. this was one of them. he had on his yellow caftan, which i       
had always thought of as a working garment rather than a social one.              
“are you ready for a short trip?” he asked me.                                    
“actually, it’s going to be a long one,” i said. “but i’m almost ready.”          
“no,” he said. “that was not the journey i meant.”                                
“oh. you mean you want to go somewhere right now?”                                
“come,” he said.                                                                  
so i followed him, and the shadows parted before us. we moved                     
through increasing bleakness, passing at last into places that bore no sign of    
life whatsoever. dark, sterile rock lay all about us, stark in the brassy light   
of a dim and ancient sun. this final place was chill and dry, and when we         
halted and i looked about, i shivered.                                            
i waited, to see what he had in mind. but it was a long while before he           
spoke. he seemed oblivious of my presence for a time, simply staring out          
across the bleak landscape.                                                       
finally, “i have taught you the ways of shadow,” he said slowly, “and             
the composition of spells and their working.”                                     
i said nothing. his statement did not seem to require a reply.                    
“so you know something of the ways of power,” he continued. “you                  
draw it from the sign of chaos, the logrus, and you invest it in various          
ways.”                                                                            
he glanced at me at last, and i nodded.                                           
“i understand that those who bear the pattern, the sign of order, may do          
similar things in ways that may or may not be similar,” he went on. “i do         
not know for certain, for i am not an initiate of the pattern. i doubt the spirit 
could stand the strain of knowing the ways of both. but you should                
understand that there is another way of power, antithetical to our own.”          
“i understand,” i said, for he seemed to be expecting an answer.                  
“but you have a resource available to you,” he said, “which those of              
amber do not. watch!”                                                             
his final word did not mean that i should simply observe as he leaned             
his staff against the side of a boulder and raised his hands before him. it       
meant that i should have the logrus before me so i could see what he was          
doing at that level. so i summoned my vision and watched him through it.          
now the vision that hung before him seemed a continuation of my own,              
stretched and twisting. i saw and felt it as he joined his hands with it and      
extended a pair of its jagged limbs outward across the distance to touch          
upon a boulder that lay downhill of us.                                           
“enter the logrus now yourself,” he said, “remaining passive. stay with           
me through what i am about to do. do not, at any time, attempt to                 
interfere.”                                                                       
“i understand,” i said.                                                           
i moved my hands into my vision, shifting them about, feeling after               
congruity, until they became a part of it.                                        
“good,” he said, when i had settled them into place. “now all you need            
do is observe, on all levels.”                                                    
something pulsed along the limbs he controlled, passing down to the               
boulder. i was not prepared for what came after.                                  
the image of the logrus turned black before me, becoming a seething               
blot of inky turmoil. an awful feeling of disruptive power surged through         
me, an enormous destructive force that threatened to overwhelm me, to             
carry me into the blissful nothingness of ultimate disorder. a part of me         
seemed to desire this, while another part was screaming wordlessly for it to      
cease. but suhuy maintained control of the phenomenon, and i could see            
how he was doing it, just as i had seen how he had brought it into being in       
the first place.                                                                  
the boulder became one with the turmoil, joined it and was gone. there            
was no explosion, no implosion, only the sensation of great cold winds and        
cacophonous sounds. then my uncle moved his hands slowly apart, and the           
lines of seething blackness followed them, flowing out in both directions         
from that area of chaos which had been the boulder, producing a long dark         
trench wherein i beheld the paradox of both nothingness and activity.             
then he stood still, arresting it at that point. moments later, he spoke. “i      
could simply release it,” he stated, “letting it run wild. or i could give it a   
direction and then release it.”                                                   
as he did not continue, i asked, “what would happen then? would it                
simply continue until it had devastated the entire shadow?”                       
“no,” he replied. “there are limiting factors. the resistance of order to         
chaos would build as it extended itself. there would come a point of              
containment.”                                                                     
“and if you remained as you are, and kept summoning more?”                        
“one would do a great deal of damage.”                                            
“and if we combined our efforts?”                                                 
“more extensive damage. but that is not the lesson i had in mind. i will          
remain passive now while you control it.”                                         
so i took over the sign of the logrus and ran the line of disruption back         
upon itself in a great circle, like a dark moat surrounding us.                   
“banish it now,” he said, and i did.                                              
still, the winds and the sounds continued to rage, and i could not see            
beyond the dark wall which seemed to be advancing slowly upon us from             
all sides.                                                                        
“obviously, the limiting factor has yet to be achieved,” i observed.              
he chuckled. “you’re right. even though you stopped, you exceeded a               
certain critical limit, so that it is now running wild.”                          
“oh,” i said. “how long till those natural limitations you mentioned              
dampen it?”                                                                       
“sometime after it has completely annihilated the area on which we                
stand,” he said.                                                                  
“it is receding in all directions as well as heading this way?”                   
“yes.”                                                                            
“interesting. what is the critical mass?”                                         
“i’ll have to show you. but we’d better find a new place first. this one          
is going away. take my hand.”                                                     
i did, and he conducted me to another shadow. this time i summoned                
the chaos and conducted the operations while he observed. this time i did         
not let it run wild.                                                              
when i had finished and i stood, shaken, staring into a small crater i            
had caused, he placed his hand on my shoulder and told me, “as you knew           
in theory, that is the ultimate power behind your spells. chaos itself. to        
work with it directly is dangerous. but, as you have seen, it can be done.        
now you know it, your training is complete.”                                      
it was more than impressive. it was awesome. and for most situations i            
could visualize it was rather like using nukes for skeet shooting. offhand, i     
couldn’t think of any circumstances under which i would care to employ the        
technique, until victor melman really pissed me off.                              
power, in its many shapes, varieties, sizes and styles, continues to              
fascinate me. it has been so much a part of my life for so long that i feel       
very familiar with it, though i doubt that i will ever understand it fully.       
                                                                     
chapter 10                                                                        
“it’s about time,” i said, to whatever lurked in the shadows. the sound that      
followed was not human. it was a low snarl. i wondered what manner of             
beast i confronted. i was certain an attack was imminent, but it did not          
come. instead the growl died down, and whatever it was spoke again.               
“feel your fear,” came the whisper.                                               
“feel your own,” i said, “while you still can.”                                   
the sounds of its breathing came heavy. the flames danced at my back.             
smoke had drawn as far away across the campsite as his lengthy tether             
permitted.                                                                        
“i could have killed you while you slept,” it said slowly.                        
“foolish of you not to,” i said. “it will cost you.”                              
“i want to look at you, merlin,” it stated. “i want to see you puzzled. i         
want to see your fear. i want to see your anguish before i see your blood.”       
“then i take it this is a personal rather than a business matter?”                
there came a strange noise which it took me several moments to                    
interpret as an inhuman throat trying to manage a chuckle.                        
then, “let us say that, magician,” it responded. “summon your sign                
and your concentration will waver. i will know it and will rend you before        
you can employ it.”                                                               
“kind of you to warn me.”                                                         
“i just wanted to foreclose that option in your thinking. the thing               
wound about your left wrist will not help you in time either.”                    
“you have good vision.”                                                           
“in these matters, yes.”                                                          
“you wish perhaps to discuss the philosophy of revenge with me now?”              
“i am waiting for you to break and do something foolish, to increase my           
pleasure. i have limited your actions to the physical, so you are doomed.”        
“keep waiting, then,” i said.                                                     
there was a sound of movement within the brush as something drew                  
nearer. i still could not see it, though. i took a step to my left then, to allow 
firelight to reach that darkened area. at that, something shone, low. the         
light was reflected, yellow, from a single glaring eye.                           
i lowered the point of my weapon, directing it toward the eye. what the           
hell. every creature i know of tries to protect its eyes.                         
“banzai!” i cried, as i lunged. the conversation seemed to have                   
stagnated, and i was anxious to get on to other matters.                          
it rose instantly and with great power and speed rushed toward me,                
avoiding my thrust. it was a large, black, lop-eared wolf, and it slipped past    
a frantic slash i managed and went straight for my throat.                        
my left forearm came up automatically and i thrust it forward into the            
open jaws. at the same time, i brought the hilt of my blade across and            
slammed it against the side of its head. at this, the clamping force of the       
bite loosened even as i was home over backward, but the grip remained,            
penetrating shirt and flesh. and i was turning and pulling before i hit the       
ground, wanting to land on top, knowing i wouldn’t.                               
i landed on my left side, attempting to continue the roll, and added              
another belt of the pommel to the side of the beast’s skull. it was then that     
fortune favored me, for a change, when i realized that we lay near the lip of     
my fire pit and were still turning in that direction. i dropped my weapon and     
sought its throat with my right hand. it was heavily muscled, and there was       
no chance of crushing the windpipe in time. but that was not what i was           
after.                                                                            
my hand went up high and back beneath the lower jaw, where i                      
commenced squeezing with all my strength. i scrabbled with my feet until i        
found purchase and then pushed with my legs as well as my arms. our               
movement continued the short distance necessary to push its snarling head         
back into the fire.                                                               
for a moment nothing happened save the steady trickle of blood from               
my forearm into its mouth and out again. the grip of its jaws was still           
strong and painful.                                                               
seconds later, my arm was released as the fur of its neck and head                
caught fire and it struggled to draw away from the flames. i was thrust aside     
as it rose and pulled free, an ear-piercing howl rising from its throat. i rolled 
to my knees and raised my hands, but it did not come at me again. instead,        
it rushed past me into the woods in the opposite direction from which it had      
come.                                                                             
i snatched up my blade and took off after it. no time to pause and pull           
on my boots; i was able to shapeshift the soles of my feet a bit to toughen       
them against the litter and irregularity of the forest floor. my adversary was    
still in sight, for its head still smoldered; though i might have been able to    
follow just from the howling, which was almost continuous. and strangely,         
the tone and character of the howls was changing, sounding more and more          
like human cries and less like the complaint of a wolf. strangely, too, the       
beast was fleeing with something less than the speed and guile i would have       
expected from one of its kind. i heard it crashing through the shrubbery and      
running into trees. on several of these latter occasions, it even emitted         
sounds that seemed to bear the pattern of human cursing. so i was able to         
stay closer to it than i had any reason to expect, even gaining on it             
somewhat after the first few minutes.                                             
then, suddenly, i realized its apparent destination. i saw again that pale        
light i had noted earlier—brighter now and its source larger, as we moved         
toward it. roughly rectangular in shape, i judged it as being eight or nine       
feet in height, perhaps five in width. i forgot about tracking the wolf by ear    
and headed for the light. that had to be its goal, and i wanted to reach it       
first.                                                                            
i ran on. the wolf was ahead of me and to my left. its hair had ceased to         
blaze now, though it still snarled and yipped as it rushed along. before us,      
the light grew brighter still, and i was able to see into it—through it and       
distinguish some of its features for the first time. i saw a hillside with a low  
stone building upon it, approached by a flagged walkway and a series of           
stone steps-framed like a picture within the rectangle—hazy at first, but         
coming clearer with each step. it was a cloudy afternoon within the picture,      
and the thing stood about twenty meters away now, in the midst of a               
clearing.                                                                         
i realized as i saw the beast burst into the clearing that i was not going        
to be able to reach the place in time to snatch up the thing i knew must lie      
nearby. still, i thought i might have a chance of catching the creature and       
halting its passage.                                                              
but it put on additional speed once it was in the clear. i could see the          
scene toward which it was headed more clearly than anything else in the           
vicinity. i shouted to distract it, but that did not work. my final burst of      
speed was not good enough. then, on the ground, near the threshold, i saw         
what i was looking for. too late. even as i watched, the beast lowered its        
head and caught up in its teeth a flat rectangular object, without even           
breaking stride.                                                                  
i halted and turned away as it plunged ahead, dropping my blade as i              
dove, rolling, continuing to roll.                                                
i felt the force of the silent explosion, followed by the implosion and the       
small series of shock waves. i lay there thinking nasty thoughts until the        
turmoil had ceased; then i rose and retrieved my weapon.                          
the night was normal about me once again. starlight. the wind in the              
pines. there was no need for me to turn, though i did, to know that the           
thing toward which i had been racing but moments before was now gone,             
without leaving any sign that it had been there, bright doorway to another        
place.                                                                            
i hiked back to my camp and spent a while talking to smoke, calming               
him. i donned my boots and cloak then, kicked dirt over the embers in my          
pit, and led the horse back to the road.                                          
i mounted there and we moved on up the road toward amber for the                  
better part of an hour, before i settled upon a new campsite under a bone-        
white piece of moon.                                                              
the rest of my night was untroubled. i was awakened by increased light            
and morning bird calls through the pines. i took care of smoke, breakfasted       
quickly on the remains of my rations, put myself in the best order i could        
and was on my way within half an hour.                                            
it was a cool morning, with banks of cumulus far off to my left, clear skies      
overhead. i did not hurry. my main reason for riding back rather than             
trumping home was to learn a little more of what this area near amber was         
like, and the other was to gain a bit of solitude for thinking. with jasra a      
prisoner, luke in sick bay and ghostwheel occupied it seemed that any             
major threats to amber or myself were in abeyance, and a small breathing          
spell could be justified. i felt that i was actually near to a point where i      
could handle everything personally with regard to luke and jasra, as soon         
as i’d worked out a few more details. and i was certain i could deal with         
ghost after that, as i’d found our most recent conversation somewhat              
encouraging.                                                                      
that was the big stuff. i could worry about loose ends later. a two-bit           
wizard like sharu garrul was only a pain when considered in conjunction           
with everything else that was troubling me. dueling with him would be no          
problem when i had a bit of leisure—though i had to admit i was puzzled as        
to why he should be interested in me at all.                                      
then there was the matter of the entity which had for a time been vinta.          
while i saw no real threat in it, there was certainly a mystery which             
affected my peace of mind, and which seemed ultimately to have something          
to do with my security. this, too, was a matter to be dealt with when that bit    
of leisure finally came along.                                                    
and luke’s offer to reveal a piece of information vital to amber’s                
security, once jasra was rescued, troubled me. because i believed him, and i      
believed he’d keep his word. i had a hunch, though, that he wouldn’t be           
giving it away unless it was too late to do much about it. guesswork was, of      
course, futile; there was no way of knowing what preparations would be            
appropriate. was the offer itself, no matter how authentic, also a bit of         
psychological warfare? luke had always been more subtle than his bluff            
exterior seemed to indicate. it had taken me a long time to learn that, and i     
wasn’t about to forget it now.                                                    
i felt i could discount the business of the blue stones for the moment,           
and i planned soon to be rid of all traces of their vibes. no problem there,      
other than a mental string around the finger for extra wariness, just in case     
—and i was already in that frame of mind, had been for some time.                 
that left the business of last night’s wolf to be fitted into the bigger          
picture.                                                                          
obviously, it had been no normal beast, and its intent had been apparent          
enough. other matters concerning its visit were less than clear, however.         
who or what was it? was it a principal or an agent? and, if the latter, who       
had sent it? and finally, finally, why?                                           
its clumsiness indicated to me—since i had tried that sort of business            
myself in the past—that it was a shapeshifted human rather than a true wolf       
magically gifted with speech. most people who daydream of transforming            
themselves into some vicious beast and going about tearing people’s throats       
out, dismembering them, disfiguring them and perhaps devouring them tend          
mainly to dwell upon how much fun it would be and generally neglect the           
practicalities of the situation. when you find yourself a quadruped, with a       
completely different center of gravity and a novel array of sensory input, it     
is not all that easy to get around for a time with any measure of grace. one      
is generally far more vulnerable than one’s appearance would lead others to       
believe. and certainly one is nowhere near as lethal and efficient as the real    
thing with a lifetime of practice behind it. no. i’ve always tended to think      
of it more as a terrorist tactic than anything else.                              
be that how it may, the manner of the beast’s coming and going was                
actually the main cause of my trepidation concerning the entire affair. it had    
employed a trump gate, which is not a thing one does lightly—or at all, for       
that matter, if it can be avoided. it is a flashy and spectacular thing, to make  
trump contact with some distant place and then pour tons of power into the        
objectification of such a gateway as a form possessed for a time of an            
independent existence. it is exceedingly profligate of energy and effort—         
even a hellrun is much easier—to create one which will stand for even             
fifteen minutes. it can drain most of your resources for a long while. yet        
this was what had occurred. the reason behind it did not trouble me, as           
much as the fact that it had happened at all. for the only people capable of      
the feat were genuine initiates of the trumps. it couldn’t be done by             
someone who just happened to come into possession of a card.                      
which narrowed the field considerably.                                            
i tried to picture the werebeast about its errand. first, it would have to        
locate me and—                                                                    
of course. i suddenly recalled the dead dogs in the grove near arbor              
house and the large doglike tracks in the vicinity. the thing had spotted me      
sometime before, then, and had been watching, waiting. it had followed me         
when i set out yesterday evening, and when i made my camp it made its             
move. it set up—or was set up with—the trump gate, for a retreat that             
would brook no pursuit. then it came to kill me. and i had no way of              
telling whether it involved sharu garrul, luke’s secret, the blue stones or       
the body-switching entity’s mission. for now it would simply have to              
dangle as yet another loose end, while i concentrated on basics.                  
i overtook and passed a line of wagons headed for amber. a few horsed             
men went by me headed in the other direction. no one i knew, though               
everyone waved. the clouds continued to mount to my left, but nothing             
resembling a storm took shape. the day remained cool and sunny. the road          
dipped and rose again, several times, though overall it rose more than it         
dipped. i stopped at a large, busy inn for lunch, had a quick, filling meal       
and did not linger. the road improved steadily after that, and it was not long    
before i caught distant glimpses of amber atop kolvir, sparkling in the           
noonday light.                                                                    
traffic grew heavier as the sun advanced through the heavens. i                   
continued to make plans and indulge in whatever speculations came to mind         
as i rode on into afternoon. my uphill way took several turnings as the route     
passed through the heights, but amber remained in sight most of the time.         
i recognized no one along the way, and i reached the eastern gate—part            
of an ancient fortification—late in the afternoon. i made my way up east          
vine and stopped at the bayle town house, where i had once attended a             
party. i left smoke with a groom at the stable in the rear, and they both         
seemed happy to see each other. i walked around to the front door then and        
knocked. a servant informed me that the baron was out, so i identified            
myself and gave him vinta’s message, which he promised to deliver when            
his employer returned.                                                            
that duty out of the way, i proceeded up east vine on foot. near the              
top, but before the slope grew roughly level, i smelled food and discarded        
my plan of waiting to eat until i was back at the palace. i halted and cast       
about me for the source of the aromas. i located it up a side street to my        
right where the way widened into a large circle, a fountain at its center in      
which a rearing copper dragon with a wonderful green patina pissed into a         
pink stone basin. the dragon faced a basement restaurant called the pit,          
with ten outside tables enclosed by a low fence of copper pickets, potted         
plants along its inside perimeter. i crossed the circle. as i passed the          
fountain i saw a great number of exotic coins within its clear water,             
including a u.s. bicentennial quarter. crossing to the fenced area, i entered,    
made my way through and was about to descend the stair when i heard my            
name called.                                                                      
“merle! over here!”                                                               
i looked about but did not see anyone i recognized at any of the four             
occupied tables. then, as my eyes retraced their route, i realized that the       
older man at the corner table to my right was smiling.                            
“bill!” i exclaimed.                                                              
bill roth rose to his feet—more a touch of display than any formality, i          
realized immediately. i hadn’t recognized him at first because he now             
sported the beginnings of a grizzled beard and a mustache. also, he had on        
brown trousers with a silver stripe running down their outside seams,             
vanishing into a pair of high brown boots. his shirt was silver with brown        
piping, and a black cloak lay folded upon the chair to his right. a wide          
black sword belt lay atop it and a sheathed blade of short-to-medium length       
was hung upon it.                                                                 
“you’ve gone native. also, you’ve lost some weight.”                              
“true,” he said, “and i’m thinking of retiring here. it agrees with me.”          
we seated ourselves.                                                              
“did you order yet?” i asked him.                                                 
“yes, but i see a waiter on the stair now,” he said. “let me catch him for        
you.”                                                                             
which he did, and ordered for me too.                                             
“your thari’s much better,” i said afterward.                                     
“lots of practice,” he replied.                                                   
“what’ve you been doing?”                                                         
“i’ve sailed with gerard. i’ve been to deiga, and to one of julian’s              
camps in arden. visited rebma, too. fascinating place. i’ve been taking           
fencing lessons. and droppa’s been showing me around town.”                       
“all the bars, most likely.”                                                      
“well, that’s not all. in fact, that’s why i’m here. he owns a half interest      
in the pit, and i had to promise him i’d eat here a lot. a good place, though.    
when did you get back?”                                                           
“just now,” i said, “and i’ve another long story for you.”                        
“good. your stories tend to be bizarre and convoluted,” he said. “just            
the thing for a cool autumn’s eve. let’s hear it.”                                
i talked throughout dinner and for a long while afterward. the day’s-             
end chill began making it uncomfortable then, so we headed for the palace.        
i finally wound up my narrative over hot cider in front of the fireplace in       
one of the smaller rooms in the eastern wing.                                     
bill shook his head. “you do manage to stay busy,” he finally said. “i            
have just one question.”                                                          
“what?”                                                                           
“why didn’t you bring luke in?”                                                   
“i already told you.”                                                             
“it wasn’t much of a reason. for some nebulous piece of information he            
says is important to amber? and you’ve got to catch him to get it?”               
“it’s not like that at all.”                                                      
“he’s a salesman, merle, and he sold you a line of shit. that’s what i            
think.”                                                                           
“you’re wrong, bill. i know him.”                                                 
“for a long time,” he agreed. “but how well? we’ve been all through               
this before. what you don’t know about luke far outweighs what you do             
know.”                                                                            
“he could have gone elsewhere, but he came to me.”                                
“you’re part of his plan, merle. he intends to get at amber through               
you.”                                                                             
“i don’t think so,” i said. “it’s not his style.”                                 
“i think he’ll use anything that comes to hand—or anyone.”                        
i shrugged. “i believe him. you don’t. that’s all.”                               
“i guess so,” he said. “what are you going to do now, wait and see what           
happens?”                                                                         
“i’ve a plan,” i said. “just because i believe him doesn’t mean i won’t           
take out insurance. but i’ve a question for you.”                                 
“yes?”                                                                            
“if i brought him back here and random decided the facts weren’t clear            
enough and he wanted a hearing, would you represent luke?”                        
his eyes widened, and then he smiled. “what kind of hearing?” he                  
asked. “i don’t know how such things are conducted here.”                         
“as a grandson of oberon,” i explained, “he’d come under house law.               
random is head of the house now. it would be up to him whether to forget          
about a thing, render a summary judgment or call a hearing. as i understand       
it, such a hearing could be as formal or informal as random wanted. there         
are books on the subject in the library. but a person has always had the right    
to be represented at one if he wanted.”                                           
“of course i’d take the case,” bill said. “it doesn’t sound like a legal          
experience that comes along too often.                                            
“but it might look like a conflict of interest,” he added, “since i have          
done work for the crown.”                                                         
i finished my cider and put the glass on the mantelpiece. i yawned. “i            
have to go now, bill.”                                                            
he nodded, then, “this is all just hypothetical, isn’t it?” he asked.             
“of course,” i said. “it might turn out to be my hearing. g’night.”               
he studied me. “uh—this insurance you were talking about,” he said.               
“it probably involves something risky, doesn’t it?”                               
i smiled.                                                                         
“nothing anyone could help you with, i suppose?”                                  
“nope.”                                                                           
“well, good luck.”                                                                
“thanks.”                                                                         
“see you tomorrow?”                                                               
“later in the day, maybe…”                                                        
i went to my room and sacked out. i had to get some rest before i went            
about the business i had in mind. i don’t recall any dreams, pro or con, on       
the matter.                                                                       
it was still dark when i woke. good to know that my mental alarm was              
working.                                                                          
it would have been very pleasant to turn over and go back to sleep, but i         
couldn’t allow myself the luxury. the day that lay ahead was to be an             
exercise in timing. accordingly, i got up, cleaned up and dressed myself in       
fresh clothes.                                                                    
i headed for the kitchen then, where i made myself some tea and toast             
and scrambled a few eggs with chilis and onions and a bit of pepper. i            
turned up some melka fruit from the snelters, too—something i hadn’t had          
in a long while.                                                                  
afterward, i went out through the rear and made my way into the                   
garden. dark it was, moonless and damp, with a few wisps of mist                  
exploring invisible paths. i followed a path to the northwest. the world was      
a very quiet place. i let my thoughts get that way, too. it was to be a one-      
thing-at-a-time day, and i wanted to start it off with that habit of mind in      
place.                                                                            
i walked until i ran out of garden, passing through a break in a hedge            
and continuing along the rough trail my path had become. it mounted               
slowly for the first few minutes, took an abrupt turn and grew immediately        
steeper. i paused at one jutting point and looked back, from where i was          
afforded a view of the dark outline of the palace, a few lighted windows          
within it. some scatters of cirrus high above looked like raked starlight in      
the celestial garden over which amber brooded. i turned away moments              
later. there was still a good distance to travel.                                 
when i reached the crest i was able to discern a faint line of lightening         
to the east, beyond the forest i had traversed so recently. i hurried past the    
three massive steps of song and story and began my descent to the north.          
slow at first, the way i followed steepened abruptly after a time and led off     
to the northeast, then into a gentler decline. when it swung back to the          
northwest there was another steep area followed by another easy one, and i        
knew the going would be fine after that. the high shoulder of kolvir at my        
back blocked all traces of the pre-dawn light i had witnessed earlier, and        
star-hung night lay before me and above, rubbing outlines to ambiguity on         
all but the nearest boulders. still, i knew approximately where i was going,      
having been this way once before, though i’d only halted briefly at that          
time.                                                                             
it was about two miles past the crest, and i slowed as i neared the area,         
searching. it was a large, somewhat horseshoe-shaped declivity, and when i        
finally located it i entered slowly, a peculiar feeling rising within me. i had   
not consciously anticipated all my reactions in this matter; but at some level    
i must have, i was certain.                                                       
as i moved into it, canyonlike walls of stone rising at either hand, i            
came upon the trail and followed it. it led me slightly downhill, toward a        
shadowy pair of trees, and then between them to where a low stone building        
stood, various shrubs and grasses grown wild about it. i understand that the      
soil was actually transported there to support the foliage, but afterward it      
was forgotten and neglected.                                                      
i seated myself on one of the stone benches in front of the building and          
waited for the sky to lighten. this was my father’s tomb—well, cenotaph—          
built long ago when he had been presumed dead. it had amused him                  
considerably to be able to visit the place later on. now, of course, its status   
might well have changed. it could be the real thing now. would this cancel        
the irony or increase it? i couldn’t quite decide. it bothered me, though,        
more than i’d thought it would. i had not come here on a pilgrimage. i had        
come here for the peace and quiet a sorcerer of my sort needs in order to         
hang some spells. i had come here—                                                
perhaps i was rationalizing. i had chosen this spot because, real tomb or         
fake, it had corwin’s name on it, so it raised a sense of his presence, for me.   
i had wanted to get to know him better, and this might be as close as i could     
ever come. i realized, suddenly, why i had trusted luke. he had been right,       
back at the arbor house. if i learned of corwin’s death and saw that blame        
could be fixed for it, i knew that i would drop everything else, that i would     
go off to present the bill and collect it, that i would have to close the         
account, to write the receipt in blood. even had i not known luke as i did,       
it was easy to see myself in his actions and too uncomfortable a thing to         
judge him.                                                                        
damn. why must we caricature each other, beyond laughter or insight,              
into the places of pain, frustration, conflicting loyalties?                      
i rose. there was enough light now to show me what i was doing.                   
i went inside and approached the niche where the empty stone                      
sarcophagus stood. it seemed an ideal safe deposit box, but i hesitated when      
i stood before it because my hands were shaking. it was ridiculous. i knew        
that he wasn’t in there, that it was just an empty box with a bit of carving on   
it. yet it was several minutes before i could bring myself to take hold of the    
lid and raise it…                                                                 
empty, of course, like so many dreams and fears. i tossed in the blue             
button and lowered the lid again. what the hell. if sharu wanted it back and      
could find it here, let him have the message that he was walking close to the     
grave when he played his games.                                                   
i went back outside, leaving my feelings in the crypt. it was time to             
begin. i’d a mess of spells to work and hang, for i’d no intention of going       
gently to the place where the wild winds blew.                                    
                                                                     
chapter 11                                                                        
i stood on the rise above the garden, admiring the autumn foliage below.          
the wind played games with my cloak. a mellow afternoon light bathed the          
palace. there was a chill in the air. a flock of dead leaves rushed, lemming-     
like, past me and blew off the edge of the trail, rattling, into the air.         
i had not really stopped to admire the view, however. i had halted while          
i blocked an attempted trump contact—the day’s second. the first had              
occurred earlier, while i was hanging a spell like a rope of tinsel on the        
image of chaos. i figured that it was either random—irritated that i was          
back in amber and had not seem fit to bring him up to date on my most             
recent doings and my plans—or luke, recovered now and wanting to                  
request my assistance in his move against the keep. they both came to             
mind because they were the two individuals i wished most to avoid; neither        
of them would much like what i was about to do, though for different              
reasons.                                                                          
the call faded, was gone, and i descended the trail, passed through the           
hedge and entered the garden. i did not want to waste a spell to mask my          
passage, so i took a trail to the left, which led through a series of arbors      
where i was less exposed to the gaze of anyone who happened to glance out         
of a window. i could have avoided this by trumping in, but that card always       
delivers one to the main hall, and i had no idea who might be there.              
of course, i was headed that way…                                                 
i went back in the way i had come out, through the kitchen, helping               
myself to a sandwich and a glass of milk on the way. then i took the back         
stairs up a flight, lurked a bit and made it to my rooms without being            
spotted. there, i buckled on the sword belt i had left hanging at the head of     
my bed, checked the blade, located a small dagger i had brought with me           
from chaos—a gift from the pit-diver borquist, whom i’d once fixed up             
with an introduction that led to a patronage (he was a middling-good poet)        
—and hung it on the other side of my belt. i pinned a trump to the inside of      
my left sleeve. i washed my hands and face and brushed my teeth, too. but         
then i couldn’t think of any other ways to stall. i had to go and do              
something i feared. it was necessary to the rest of my plan. i was                
overwhelmed by a sudden desire to be off sailing. just lying on the beach         
would do, actually…                                                               
instead, i departed my quarters and made my way back downstairs,                  
returning the way i had come. i headed west along the back corridor,              
listening for footsteps and voices, retreating once into a closet to let some     
nameless parties pass. anything to avoid official notice for just a little        
longer. finally, i turned left, walked a few paces and waited the better part     
of a minute before entering the major corridor, which led past the large          
marble dining hall. no one in sight. good. i sprinted to the nearest entrance     
and peered within. great. the place was not in use. it wasn’t normally used       
every day, but i’d no way of knowing whether today was some state                 
occasion—though this was not a normal dining hour either.                         
i entered and passed through. there is a dark, narrow corridor to its rear,       
with a guard normally posted somewhere near the passage’s mouth or the            
door at its end. all members of the family have access there, though the          
guard would log our passage. his superior wouldn’t have that information          
until the guard reported when he went off duty, though. by then it shouldn’t      
matter to me.                                                                     
tod was short, stocky, bearded. when he saw me coming he presented                
arms with an ax that had been leaning against the wall moments before. “at        
ease. busy?” i asked.                                                             
“to tell the truth, no, sir.”                                                     
“i’ll be heading down. i hope there are some lanterns up here. i don’t            
know that stairway as well as most.”                                              
“i checked a number inside when i came on duty, sir. i’ll light you one.”         
might as well save the energy that would have gone into the fire spell, i         
decided. every little bit helps…                                                  
“thanks.”                                                                         
he opened the door, hefted, successively, three lanterns which stood              
inside to the right, selected the second one. he took it back outside, where      
he lit it from the massive candle in its stand partway up the corridor.           
“i’ll be awhile,” i said as i accepted it from him. “you’ll probably be off       
duty before i’m finished.”                                                        
“very good, sir. watch your step.”                                                
“believe me, i will.”                                                             
the long spiraling stair turned round and round with very little visible          
in any direction but below, where a few chimneyed candles, sconced                
torches or hung lanterns flared along the central shaft, doing more for           
acrophobia than absolute blackness might, i suppose. there were just those        
little dots of light below me. i couldn’t see the distant floor, or any walls. i  
kept one hand on the railing and held the lantern out in front with the other.    
damp down here. musty, too. not to mention chilly.                                
again, i tried counting the steps. as usual, i lost count somewhere               
along the way. next time…                                                         
my thoughts went back to that distant day when i had come this route              
believing i was headed for death. the fact that i hadn’t died was small           
comfort now. it had still been an ordeal. and it was still possible that i        
could screw up on it this time and get fried or go up in a puff of smoke.         
around, around. down, down. night thoughts in the middle of the                   
afternoon…                                                                        
on the other hand, i’d heard flora say that it was easier the second time         
around. she’d been talking about the pattern moments before, and i hoped          
that’s what she was referring to.                                                 
the grand pattern of amber, emblem of order. matching in power the                
great logrus of the courts, sign of chaos. the tensions between the two           
seem to generate everything that matters. get involved with either, lose          
control—and you’re done for. just my luck to be involved with both. i’ve          
no one with whom to compare notes as to whether this makes things                 
rougher, though it massages my ego to think that the mark of the one makes        
the other more difficult… and they do mark you, both of them. at some             
level you are torn apart and reassembled along the lines of vast cosmic           
principles when you undergo such an experience—which sounds noble,                
important, metaphysical, spiritual and lovely, but is mainly a pain in the ass.   
it is the price we pay for certain pawers, but there is no cosmic principle       
requiring me to say i enjoy it.                                                   
both the pattern and the logrus give to their initiates the ability to            
traverse shadow unassisted—shadow being the generic term for the                  
possibly infinite collection of reality variations we play about in. and they     
also give us other abilities…                                                     
around and down. i slowed. i was feeling slightly dizzy, just like                
before. at least i wasn’t planning on coming back this way…                       
when the bottom finally came into sight i speeded up again. there was             
a bench, a table, a few racks and cases, a light to show them all. normally,      
there was a guard on duty there, but i didn’t see one. could be off making        
rounds, though. there were cells somewhere to the left in which                   
particularly unfortunate political prisoners might sometimes be found             
scrabbling about and going slowly out of their minds. i didn’t know               
whether there were any such individuals doing time at the moment. i kind          
of hoped not. my father had once been one, and from his description of the        
experience it did not sound like easy time to do.                                 
i halted when i reached the floor and called out a couple of times. i got         
back a suitably eerie echo, but no answer.                                        
i moved to the rack and took up a filled lantern with my other hand. an           
extra one might come in handy. it was possible i would lose my way. i             
headed to the right then. the tunnel i wanted lay in that direction. after a      
long while, i stopped and raised a light, as it almost seemed i had come too      
far. there was still no tunnel mouth in sight. i looked back. the guard post      
was still in sight. i continued on, searching my memories of that last time.      
finally, there was a shifting of sounds—abrupt echoes of my footfalls. it         
would seem i was nearing a wall, an obstacle. i raised a lantern again. yes.      
pure darkness ahead. gray stone about it. i went that way.                        
dark. far. there was a continuous shadow-show as my light slid over               
rocky irregularities, as its beams glanced off specks of brightness in the        
stone walls. then there was a side passage to my left. i passed it and kept       
going. it seemed there should be another fairly soon. yes. two…                   
the third was farther along. then there was a fourth. i wondered idly             
where they all led. no one had ever said anything about them to me. maybe         
they didn’t know either. bizarre grottoes of indescribable beauty? other          
worlds? dead ends? storerooms? one day, perhaps, when time and                    
inclination came together…                                                        
five…                                                                             
and then another.                                                                 
it was the seventh one i wanted. i halted when i came to it. it didn’t go         
back all that far. i thought of the others who’d passed this way, and then i      
strode ahead, to the big, heavy, metal-bound door. there was a great key          
hanging from a steel hook that had been driven into the wall to my right. i       
took it down, unlocked the door and hung it back up again, knowing that           
the downstairs guard would check it and re-lock it at some point in his           
rounds; and i wondered—not for the first time—why it should be locked             
that way in the first place if the key was kept right there. it made it seem as   
if there were danger from something that might emerge from within. i had          
asked about that, but no one i’d questioned seemed to know. tradition, i’d        
been told. gerard and flora had suggested, respectively, that i ask random        
or fiona. and they had both thought benedict might know, but i’d never            
remembered to ask him.                                                            
i pushed hard and nothing happened. i put down the lanterns and tried             
again, harder. the door creaked and moved slowly inward. i recovered the          
lanterns and entered.                                                             
the door closed itself behind me, and frakir—child of chaos—pulsed                
wildly. i recalled my last visit and remembered why no one had brought an         
extra lantern upon that occasion: the bluish glow of the pattern within the       
smooth, black floor lit the grotto well enough for one to see one’s way           
about.                                                                            
i lit the other lantern. i set the first one down at the near end of the          
pattern and carried the other one with me about the periphery of the thing,       
setting it down at a point on its farther side. i did not care that the pattern   
provided sufficient illumination to take care of the business at hand. i found    
the damned thing spooky, cold and downright intimidating. having an extra         
natural light near at hand made me feel a lot better in its presence.             
i studied that intricate mass of curved lines as i moved to the corner            
where they began. i had quieted frakir but i had not entirely subdued my          
own apprehensions. if it were a response of the logrus within me, i               
wondered whether my reaction to the logrus itself would be worse were i           
to go back and essay it again, now that i bore the pattern as well. fruitless     
speculation…                                                                      
i tried to relax. i breathed deeply. i shut my eyes for a moment. i bent          
my knees. i lowered my shoulders. no use waiting any longer…                      
i opened my eyes and set my foot upon the pattern. immediately, sparks            
rose about my foot. i took another step. more sparks. a tiny crackling            
noise. another step. a bit of resistance as i moved again…                        
it all came back to me—everything i had felt the first time through: the          
chill, the small shocks, the easy areas and the difficult ones. there was a       
map of the pattern somewhere inside me, and it was almost as if i read from       
it as i moved along that first curve, resistance rising, sparks flying, my hair   
stirring, the crackling, a kind of vibration…                                     
i reached the first veil, and it was like walking in a wind tunnel. every         
movement involved heavy effort. resolve, though; that was all that it really      
took. if i just kept pushing i would advance, albeit slowly. the trick was not    
to stop. starting again could be horrible, and in some places impossible.         
steady pressure was all that was required just now. a few moments more            
and i would be through. the going would be easier. it was the second veil         
that was the real killer…                                                         
turn, turn…                                                                       
i was through. i knew the way would be easy now for a time. i began to            
stride with a bit of confidence. perhaps flora had been right. this part          
seemed a little less difficult than it had the first time. i negotiated a long    
curve, then a sharp switchback. the sparks reached up to my boottops now.         
my mind was flooded with april thirtieths, with family politics in the            
courts, where people dueled and died as the succession to the succession to       
the succession wound and shifted its intricate way through blood rituals of       
status and elevation. no more. i was done with all that. push it away. they       
might be a lot politer about it, but more blood was spilled there than in         
amber, and for the damnedest small advantages over one’s fellows…                 
i gritted my teeth. it was hard to keep my mind focused on the task at            
hand. part of the effect, of course. i remembered that too, now. another          
step… tingling sensations all the way up my legs… the crackling sounds            
as loud as a storm to me… one foot in front of the other… pick them up,           
put them down… hair standing on end now… turn… push… bringing the                 
starburst in before an autumn squall, luke running the sails, wind like the       
breath of dragons at our back… three more steps and resistance rises…             
i am upon the second veil, and it is suddenly as if i am trying to push a         
car out of a muddy ditch… all my strength goes forward, and the return on         
it is infinitesimal. i move with glacial slowness and the sparks are about my     
waist. i am blue flame…                                                           
my mind is abruptly stripped of distraction. even time goes away and              
leaves me alone. there is only this pastless, nameless thing i am become,         
striving with its entire being against the inertia of all its days—an equation    
so finely balanced that i should be frozen here in mid-stride forever, save       
that this cancellation of masses and forces leaves the will unimpaired,           
purifies it in a way, so that the process of progress seems to transcend the      
physical striving…                                                                
another step, and another, and i am through, and ages older and moving            
again, and i know that i am going to make it despite the fact that i am           
approaching the grand curve, which is tough and tricky and long. not at all       
like the logrus. the power here is synthetic, not analytic…                       
the universe seemed to wheel about me. each step here made me feel                
as if i were fading and coming back into focus, being broken down and             
reassembled, scattered and gathered, dying and reviving…                          
outward. onward. three more curves then, followed by a straight line. i           
pushed ahead. dizzy, nauseated. soaking wet. end of the line. a series of         
arcs. turn. turn. turn again…                                                     
i knew that i was coming up to the final veil when the sparks rose to             
become a cage of lightnings and my feet began to drag again. the stillness        
and the terrible pushing…                                                         
but this time i felt somehow fortified, and i drove onward knowing that           
i would win through…                                                              
i made it, shaking, and only a single short arc remained. those final             
three steps may well be the worst, however. it is as if, having gotten to         
know you this well, the pattern is reluctant to release you. i fought it here,    
my ankles sore as at any race’s end. two steps… three                             
off. standing still. panting and shuddering. peace. gone the static.              
gone the sparks. if that didn’t wash off the blue stones’ vibes i didn’t know     
what would.                                                                       
now—well, in a minute—i could go anywhere. from this point, in this               
moment of empowerment, i could command the pattern to transport me                
anywhere and i would be there delivered. hardly a thing to waste to, say,         
save myself a walks up the spiral staircase and back to my rooms. no. i had       
other plans. in a minute…                                                         
i adjusted my apparel, ran my hand through my hair, checked my                    
weapons and my hidden trump, waited for the pounding of my pulse to               
subside.                                                                          
luke had sustained his injuries in a battle at the keep of the four               
worlds, fighting with his former friend and ally dalt, the mercenary, son of      
the desacratrix. dalt meant little to me save as a possible obstacle, in that     
he now seemed in the employ of the keeper of the keep. but even allowing          
for any time differential—which was probably not that great—i had seen            
him fairly soon following his fight with luke. which seemed to indicate           
that he was at the keep when i had reached him via his trump.                     
okay.                                                                             
i tried to recall it, my memory of the room where i had reached dalt. it          
was pretty sketchy. what was the minimum amount of data the pattern               
required in order to operate? i recalled the texture of the stone wall, the       
shape of the small window, a bit of worn tapestry upon the wall, strewn           
rushes on the floor; a low bench and a stool had come into view to his rear       
when dalt had moved, a crack in the wall above them—and a bit of                  
cobweb…                                                                           
i formed the image as sharply as i could. i willed myself there. i wanted         
to be in that place…                                                              
and i was.                                                                        
i turned around quickly, my hand on the hilt of my blade, but i was               
alone in the chamber. i saw a bed and an armoire, a small writing table, a        
storage chest, none of which had been in my line of sight during my brief         
view of the place. daylight shone through the small window.                       
i crossed the room to its single door and stood there for a long while,           
listening. there was only silence on the other side. i opened it a crack—it       
swung to the left—and looked upon a long, empty hallway. i eased the door         
farther open. there was a stairway directly across from me, leading down.         
to my left was a blank wall. i stepped outside and closed the door. go            
down or go right? there were several windows on both sides of the                 
hallway. i moved to the nearest one, which was to my right, and looked out.       
i saw that i was near to the lower corner of a rectangular courtyard,             
more buildings across the way and to my right and left, all of them               
connected at the corners save for an opening to the upper right which             
seemed as if it led to another courtyard where a very large structure rose        
beyond the buildings directly across from me. there were perhaps a dozen          
troops in the courtyard below, disposed near various entranceways, though         
not giving the appearance of being formally on guard—that is, they were           
engaged in cleaning and repairing their gear. two of them were heavily            
bandaged. still, most seemed in such a state that they could leap to service      
fairly quickly.                                                                   
at the yard’s far end was a strange bit of flotsam, looking like a large          
broken kite, which seemed somehow familiar. i decided to head along the           
hallway, which paralleled the courtyard, for it seemed that this would take       
me into those buildings along the farther edge of the perimeter and probably      
give me a view into the next yard.                                                
i moved along the hallway, alert to any sounds of activity. there was             
nothing but silence as i advanced to the corner. i waited there for a long        
while, listening.                                                                 
in that i heard nothing, i rounded the corner then, and froze. so did the         
man seated on the windowsill to the right. he wore a chain mail shirt, a          
leather cap, leather leggings and boots. there was a heavy blade at his side,     
but it was a dagger that he held in his hand, apparently giving himself a         
manicure. he looked as surprised as i felt when his head jerked in my             
direction.                                                                        
“who are you?” he asked.                                                          
his shoulders straightened and he lowered his hands as if to push                 
himself from his perch and into a standing position.                              
embarrassing to both of us. he seemed to be a guard. whereas alertness            
or attempted stealth might have betrayed him to frakir or myself, sloth had       
provided him with excellent concealment and me with a small dilemma. i            
was sure i couldn’t bluff him, or trust to the result if i seemed to. i did not   
wish to attack him and create a lot of noise. this narrowed my choices. i         
could kill him quickly and silently with a neat little cardiac-arrest spell i     
had hanging in front of me. but i value life too highly to waste it when          
there is no need. so, as much as i hated to spend another spell that i carried    
this soon, i spoke the word that caused my hand to move reflexively               
through an accompanying gesture, and i had a glimpse of the logrus as its         
force pulsed through me. the man closed his eyes and slumped back                 
against the casement. i adjusted his position against slippage and left him       
snoring peacefully, the dagger still in his hand. besides, i might have a         
greater need for the cardiac-arrest spell later.                                  
the corridor entered some sort of gallery ahead, which seemed to bulge            
in both directions. in that i could not see what lay at either hand beyond a      
certain point, i knew that i would have to expend another spell sooner than i     
might wish. i spoke the word for my invisibility spell, and the world grew        
several shades darker. i had been hoping to get a little farther before i had to  
use it, since it was only good for about twenty minutes and i had no idea         
where my prize might lie. but i couldn’t afford to take chances. i hurried        
along and passed into the gallery, which proved empty.                            
i learned a little more geography in that place, though. i had a view             
from there into the next courtyard, and it was gigantic. it contained the         
massive structure i had glimpsed from the other side. it was a huge, solidly      
built fortress; it appeared to have only one entrance, and that well guarded.     
from the opposite side of the gallery, i saw that there was also an outer         
courtyard, leading up to high, well-fortified walls.                              
i departed the gallery and sought a flight of stairs, almost certain that         
that hulking gray-stone structure was the place i should be searching. it had     
an aura of magic about it that i could feel down to my toes.                      
i jogged along the hallway, took a turn and saw a guard at the head of a          
stairway. if he felt anything of my passage it was only the breeze stirred by     
my cloak. i rushed down the stairs. there was an adit at its foot, leading to     
another corridor—a dark one—off to the left; and there was a heavy                
ironbound door directly before me, in the wall facing the inner courtyard.        
i pushed the door open, passed through and stepped aside quickly, for a           
guard had turned, stared and was beginning to approach. i avoided him and         
moved toward the citadel. a focus of powers, luke had said. yes. i could          
feel this more strongly the closer i got to the place. i did not have time to     
try to figure out how to deal with them, to channel them. anyway, i’d             
brought along my private stock.                                                   
when i neared the wall i cut to the left. a quick circuit was in order, for       
informational purposes. partway around it, i saw that my guess that there         
was only one apparent entrance was correct. also, there were no windows           
in its walls lower than about thirty feet. there was a high, spiked metal         
fence about the place, and a pit on the inside of the fence. the thing that       
most surprised me was not a feature of the structure, however. on its far         
side, near the wall, were two more of the large broken kites and three            
relatively intact ones. the matter of context no longer clouded my                
perception—not with the unbroken ones before me. they were hang                   
gliders. i was eager to take a closer look at them, but time was running on       
my invisibility and i couldn’t afford the detour. i hurried the rest of the way   
around and studied the gate.                                                      
the gate to the fence was closed and flanked by two guards. several               
paces beyond it was a removable wooden bridge, reinforced with metal              
strapping, in place across the ditch. there were large eye bolts at its corners,  
and there was a winch built into the wall above the gate; the winch bore          
four chains terminating in hooks. i wondered how heavy the bridge was.            
the door to the citadel was recessed about three feet into the stone wall, and    
it was high, wide and plated, looking as if it could withstand a battering        
ram’s pounding for a good long while.                                             
i approached the gate to the fence and studied it. no lock on it—just a           
simple hand-operated latching mechanism. i could open it, run through,            
dash across the span and be at the big door before the guards had any idea        
as to what might be going on. on the other hand, considering the nature of        
the place, they might well have had some instruction as to the possibility of     
an unnatural attack. if so, it would not be necessary for them to see me if       
they responded quickly and cornered me in the alcove. and i’d a feeling the       
heavy door inside was not unlocked.                                               
i mused for several moments, sorting through my spells. i also checked            
again on the position of the six or eight other people in the yard. none were     
too near, none moving in this direction…                                          
i advanced upon the guards quietly and placed frakir on the shoulder of           
the man to my left with an order for a quick choke. three rapid steps to the      
right, then, and i struck the other guard on the left side of his neck with the   
edge of my hand. i caught him beneath the armpits, to prevent the rattling a      
fall would produce, and lowered him to his rump, back against the fence, to       
the right of the gate. behind me, though, i heard the clatter of the other        
man’s scabbard against the fence as he slumped, clutching at his throat. i        
hurried to him, guided him the rest of the way to the ground and removed          
frakir. a quick glance about showed me that two other men across the              
courtyard were now looking in this direction. damn.                               
i unlatched the gate, slipped within, closed it and latched it behind me. i       
hurried across the bridge then and looked back. the two men i had noticed         
were now headed in this direction. therefore, i was immediately presented         
with another choice. i decided to see how arduous the more strategically          
sound one might be.                                                               
squatting, i caught hold of the nearest corner of the bridge—to my                
right. the ditch it spanned seemed something like twelve feet in depth, and       
it was almost twice that in width.                                                
i began straightening my legs. damned heavy, but the thing creaked and            
my corner rose several inches. i held it there for a moment, got control of       
my breathing and tried again. more creaking and a few more inches.                
again… my hands hurt where the edges pressed into them. my arms felt as           
if they were being slowly wrenched from their sockets. as i straightened          
my legs and strained upward with even greater exertion, i wondered how            
many people fail in robust undertakings because of sudden lower back              
problems. i guess they’re the ones you don’t hear about. i could feel my          
heart pounding as if it filled my entire chest. my corner was now about a         
foot above the ground, but the edge to my left was still touching. i strained     
again, feeling the perspiration appear as if by magic across my brow and          
under my arms. breathe… up!                                                       
it went to knee level, then above. the corner to my left was finally              
raised. i heard the voices of the two approaching men—loud, excited—they          
were hurrying now. i began edging to my left, dragging the whole structure        
with me. the corner directly across from me moved outward as i did so.            
good. i kept moving. the corner to my left was now a couple of feet out           
over the chasm. i felt fiery pains all the way up my arms and into my             
shoulders and neck. farther…                                                      
the men were at the gate now, but they paused to examine the fallen               
guards. good, again. i still wasn’t certain that the bridge might not catch       
and hold if i were to drop it. it had to slip into the chasm, or i was making     
myself a candidate for disk surgery for nothing. left…                            
it began swaying in my grip, tipping to the right. i could tell that it was       
going to slip from my control in a few moments. left again, left… almost…         
the men had turned their attention from the fallen guards to the moving           
bridge now and were fumbling at the latch. two more were rushing to join          
them from across the way, and i heard a series of shouts. another step. the       
thing was really slipping now. i wasn’t going to be able to hold it… one          
more step…                                                                        
let go and get back!                                                              
my corner crashed against the edge of the chasm, but the wood                     
splintered and the edge gave way and i kept retreating. the span flopped          
over as it fell, struck against the far side twice and hit the bottom with a      
terrific crash. my arms hung at my sides, useless for the moment.                 
i turned and headed for the doorway. my spell was still holding, so at            
least i was not a target for any hurled missiles from the other side of the       
moat.                                                                             
when i got to the door it took all that i had of effort to raise my arms to       
the big ring on the right-hand side and catch hold of it. but nothing             
happened when i pulled. the thing was secured. i had expected that,               
though, and was prepared. i’d had to try first, however. i do not spend my        
spells lightly.                                                                   
i spoke the words, three of them this time—less elegant because it was a          
sloppy spell, though it possessed immense force.                                  
my entire body shook as the door exploded inward as if kicked by a                
giant wearing a steel-toed boot. i entered immediately and was immediately        
confused as my eyes adjusted to the dimness. i was in a two-story-high hall.      
stairways rose to the right and the left ahead of me, curving inward toward       
a railed landing, the terminus of a second-floor hallway. there was another       
hallway below it, directly across from me. two stairways also headed              
downward, to the rear of those which ascended. decisions, decisions…              
in the center of the room was a black stone fountain, spraying flames—            
not water—into the air; the fire descended into the font’s basin, where it        
swirled and danced. the flames were red and orange in the air, white and          
yellow below, rippling. a feeling of power filled the chamber. anyone who         
could control the forces loose in this place would be a formidable opponent       
indeed. with luck, i might not have to discover how formidable.                   
i almost wasted a special attack when i became aware of the two figures           
in the corner, off to my right. but they hadn’t stirred at all. they were         
unnaturally still. statues, of course…                                            
i was trying to decide whether to go up, go down or move straight                 
ahead, and i’d just about decided to descend, on the theory that there is         
some sort of instinct to imprison enemies in dank, below-ground quarters,         
when something about the two statues drew my attention again. my vision           
having adjusted somewhat, i could now make out that one was a white-              
haired man, the other a dark-haired woman. i rubbed my eyes, not realizing        
for several seconds that i had seen the outline of my hand. my invisibility       
spell was dissipating…                                                            
i moved toward the figures. the fact that the old man was holding a               
couple of cloaks and hats should have been the tipoff. but i raised the skirt     
of his dark blue robe anyway. in the suddenly brighter light from the             
fountain i saw where the name rinaldo had been carved into his right              
leg. nasty little kid, that.                                                      
the woman at his side was jasra, saving me the problem of seeking her             
amid rodents below. her arms were also outstretched, as in a warding              
gesture, and someone had hung a pale blue umbrella upon the left and a            
light gray london fog raincoat upon the right; the matching rain hat was on       
her head, at a lopsided angle. her face had been painted like a clown’s and       
someone had pinned a pair of yellow tassels to the front of her green blouse.     
the light behind me flared even more brightly, and i turned to see what           
was going on. the fountain, it turned out, was now spewing its liquid-like        
fires a full twenty feet into the air. they descended to overflow the basin       
and spread outward across the flagged floor. a major rivulet was headed in        
my direction. at that point, a soft chuckle caused me to look upward.             
wearing a dark robe, cowl and gauntlets, the wizard of the cobalt mask            
stood on the landing above me, one hand on the railing, the other pointed         
toward the fountain. in that i had anticipated our meeting on this                
expedition, i was not unprepared for the encounter. as the flames leaped          
even higher, forming a great bright tower that almost immediately began to        
bend and then topple toward me, i raised my arms in a wide gesture and            
spoke the word for the most appropriate of the three defensive spells i had       
hung earlier.                                                                     
air currents began to stir, powered by the logrus, almost immediately             
achieving gale force and sending the flames back away from me. i adjusted         
my position then so that they were blown toward the wizard upstairs.              
instantly, he gestured, and the flames fell back within the fountain,             
subsiding to the barest glowing trickle.                                          
okay. a draw. i had not come here to have it out with this guy. i had             
come to finesse luke by rescuing jasra on my own. once she was my                 
prisoner, amber would sure as hell be safe from anything luke had in              
mind. i found myself wondering, though, about this wizard, as my winds            
died down and the chuckle came again: was he using spells, as i was? or,          
living in the midst of a power source such as this, was he able to control the    
forces directly and shape them as he chose? if it were the latter, which i        
suspected, then he had a virtually inexhaustible source of tricks up his          
sleeve, so that in any full-scale competition on his turf i would eventually      
be reduced to flight or to calling in the nukes—that is, summoning chaos          
itself to utterly reduce everything in the area—and this was a thing i was        
not about to do, destroying all the mysteries, including that of the wizard’s     
identity, rather than solving them for answers that might be essential to         
amber’s well-being.                                                               
a shining metallic spear materialized in midair before the wizard, hung           
a moment, then flashed toward me. i used my second defensive spell,               
summoning a shield that turned it aside.                                          
the only alternative i could see to my dueling with spells or blasting the        
place with chaos would be for me to learn to control the forces here myself       
and try beating this guy at his own game. no time for practice now, though;       
i’d a job to do as soon as i could buy a few moments in which to get it           
done. sooner or later, however, it seemed that we would have to have a full       
confrontation—since he seemed to have it in for me, and may well even             
have been the motive force behind the attack by the clumsy werewolf in the        
woods.                                                                            
and i was not hot on taking chances to explore the power here further at          
this point—not if jasra had been good enough to beat the original master of       
this place, sharu garrul, and then this guy had been good enough to beat          
jasra. i’d give a lot, though, to know why he had it in for me…                   
so, “what do you want, anyway?” i called out.                                     
immediately, that metallic voice replied, “your blood, your soul, your            
mind and your body.”                                                              
“what about my stamp collection?” i hollered back. “do i get to keep              
the first day covers?”                                                            
i moved over beside jasra and threw my right arm about her shoulders.             
“what do you want with that one, funny man?” the wizard asked. “she               
is the most worthless property in this place.”                                    
“then why should you object to my taking her off your hands?”                     
“you collect stamps. i collect presumptuous sorcerers. she’s mine, and            
you’re next.”                                                                     
i felt the power rising against me again even as i shouted, “what have            
you got against your brothers and sisters in the art?”                            
there was no reply, but the air about me was suddenly filled with sharp,          
spinning shapes—knives, ax blades, throwing stars, broken bottles. i spoke        
the word for my final defense, the curtain of chaos, raising a chittering,        
smoky screen about us. the sharp items hurtling in our direction were             
instantly reduced to cosmic dust on coming into contact with it.                  
above the din of this engagement i cried out; “by what name shall i               
call you?”                                                                        
“mask!” was the wizard’s immediate reply—not very original, i                     
thought. i’d half expected a john d. macdonald appellation—nightmare              
mauve or cobalt casque, perhaps. oh, well.                                        
i had just used my last defensive spell. i had also just raised my left arm       
so that that portion of my sleeve bearing the amber trump now hung                
within my field of vision. i had cut things a bit fine, but i had not yet played  
my full hand. so far, i had run a completely defensive show, and i was            
rather proud of the spell i had kept in reserve.                                  
“she’ll do you no good, that one,” mask said, as both our spells                  
subsided and he prepared to strike again.                                         
“have a nice day, anyway,” i said, and i rotated my wrists, pointed my            
fingers to direct the flow and spoke the word that beat him to the punch.         
“an eye for an eye!” i called out, as the contents of an entire florist shop      
fell upon mask, completely burying him in the biggest damned bouquet i’d          
ever seen. smelled nice, too.                                                     
there was silence and a subsidence of forces as i regarded the trump,             
reached through it. just as the contact was achieved there was a disturbance      
in the floral display and mask rose through it, like the allegory of spring.      
i was probably already fading from his view as he said, “i’ll have you            
yet.”                                                                             
“and sweets to the sweet,” i replied, then spoke the word that                    
completed the spell, dropping a load of manure upon him.                          
i stepped through into the main hall of amber, bearing jasra with me.             
martin stood near a sideboard, a glass of wine in his hand, talking with          
bors, the falconer. he grew silent at bors’s wide-eyed stare in my direction,     
then turned and stared himself.                                                   
i set jasra on her feet beside the doorway. i was not about to screw              
around with the spell on her right now—and i was not at all sure what i’d         
do with her if i released her from it. so i hung my cloak on her, went over       
to the sideboard and poured myself a glass of wine, nodding to bors and           
martin as i passed.                                                               
i drained the glass, put it down, then said to them, “whatever you do,            
don’t carve your initials on her.” then i went and found a sofa in a room to      
the east, stretched out on it and closed my eyes. like a bridge over troubled     
waters. some days are diamonds. where have all the flowers gone?                  
something like that.                                                              
                                                                     
chapter 12                                                                        
there was a lot of smoke, a giant worm and many flashes of colored light.         
every sound was born into form, blazed to its peak, faded as it waned.            
lightning-like stabs of existence, these—called from, returning to, shadow.       
the worm went on forever. the dog-headed flowers snapped at me but later          
wagged their leaves. the flowing smoke halted before a skyhooked traffic          
light. the worm—no, caterpillar—smiled. a slow, blinding rain began, and          
all the drifting drops were faceted…                                              
what is wrong with this picture? something within me asked.                       
i gave up, because i couldn’t be sure. though i’d a vague feeling the             
occasional landscape shouldn’t be flowing the way that it did…                    
“oh, man! merle…”                                                                 
what did luke want now? why wouldn’t he get off my case? always a                 
new problem.                                                                      
“look at that, will you?”                                                         
i watched where a series of bright bounding balls—or maybe they were              
comets—wove a tapestry of light. it fell upon the forest of umbrellas.            
“luke—” i began, but one of the dog-headed flowers bit a hand i’d                 
forgotten about, and everything nearby cracked as if it were painted on           
glass through which a shot had just passed. there was a rainbow beyond—           
“merle! merle!”                                                                   
it was droppa shaking my shoulder, my suddenly opened eyes showed                 
me. and there was a damp place on the sofa where my head was resting. i           
propped myself on an elbow. i rubbed my eyes.                                     
“droppa… what—?”                                                                  
“i don’t know,” he told me.                                                       
“what don’t you know? i mean… hell! what happened?”                               
“i was sitting in that chair,” he said, with a gesture, “waiting for you to       
wake up. martin had told me you were here. i was just going to tell you that      
random wanted to see you when you got back.”                                      
i nodded, then noticed that my hand was oozing blood—from the place               
where the flower had bitten me.                                                   
“how long was i out?”                                                             
“twenty minutes, maybe.”                                                          
i swung my feet to the floor, sat up. “so why’d you decide to wake                
me?”                                                                              
“you were trumping out,” he said.                                                 
“trumping out? while i was asleep? it doesn’t work that way. are you              
sure”                                                                             
“i am, unfortunately, sober at the moment,” he said. “you got that                
rainbow glow and you started to soften around the edges and fade. thought         
i’d better wake you then and ask if that’s what you really had in mind.           
what’ve you been drinking, spot remover?”                                         
“no,” i said.                                                                     
“i tried it on my dog once…”                                                      
“dreams,” i said, massaging my temples, which had begun throbbing.                
“that’s all. dreams.”                                                             
“the kind other people can see, too? like dts á deux?”                            
“that’s not what i meant.”                                                        
“we’d better go see random.” he started to turn toward the doorway.               
i shook my head. “not yet. i’m just going to sit here and collect myself.         
something’s wrong.”                                                               
when i glanced at him i saw that his eyes were wide, and he was staring           
past me. i turned.                                                                
the wall at my back seemed to be melting, as if it were cast of wax and           
had been set too near a fire.                                                     
“it appears to be alarums and excursions time,” droppa remarked.                  
“help!” and he was across the room and out of the door, screaming.                
three eyeblinks later the wall was normal again in every way, but i was           
trembling. what the hell was going on? had mask managed to lay a spell            
on me before i’d cut out? if so, where was it headed?                             
i rose to my feet and turned in a slow circle. everything seemed to be in         
place now. i knew that it could not have been anything as simple as               
hallucination born of all my recent stresses, since droppa had seen it too.       
so i was not cracking up. this was something else—and whatever it was, i          
felt that it was still lurking nearby. there was a certain unnatural clarity to   
the air now, and every object seemed unusually vivid within it.                   
i made a quick circuit of the room, not knowing what i was really                 
seeking. not surprisingly, therefore, i did not find it. i stepped outside then.  
whatever the problem, could it spring from something i had brought back           
with me? might jasra, stiff and gaudy, have been a trojan horse?                  
i headed for the main hall. a dozen steps along the way, a lopsided               
gridwork of light appeared before me. i forced myself to continue, and it         
receded as i advanced, changing shape as it did so.                               
“merle, come on!” luke’s voice, luke himself nowhere in sight.                    
“where?” i called out, not slowing.                                               
no answer, but the gridwork split down the middle and its two halves              
swung away from me like a pair of shutters. they opened onto a                    
nearblinding light; within it, i thought i glimpsed a rabbit. then, abruptly,     
the vision was gone, and the only thing that saved me from believing              
everything was normal again was several seconds’ worth of luke’s                  
sourceless laughter.                                                              
i ran. was it really luke who was the enemy, as i had been warned                 
repeatedly? had i somehow been manipulated through everything which               
had happened recently, solely for the purpose of freeing his mother from the      
keep of the four worlds? and now that she was safe had he the temerity to         
invade amber herself and summon me to a sorcerous duel the terms of               
which i did not even understand?                                                  
no, i could not believe it. i was certain he did not possess that sort of         
power. but even if he did, he wouldn’t dare try it—not with jasra my              
hostage.                                                                          
as i rushed along i heard him again—from everywhere, from nowhere.                
this time he was singing. he had a powerful baritone voice, and the song          
was “auld lang syne.” what sort of irony did this represent?                      
i burst into the main hall. martin and bors had departed. i saw their             
empty glasses on the sideboard near which they had been standing. and             
near the other door—? yes, near the other door jasra remained, erect,             
unchanged, still holding my cloak.                                                
“okay, luke! let’s have it out!” i cried. “cut the crap and let’s settle          
this business!”                                                                   
“huh?”                                                                            
the singing stopped abruptly.                                                     
i crossed slowly to jasra, studying her as i went. completely                     
unchanged, save for a hat someone had added to her other hand. from               
somewhere else in the palace, i heard a shout. maybe it was droppa still          
alaruming.                                                                        
“luke, wherever you are,” i said, “if you can hear me, if you can see             
me, take a good look and listen: i’ve got her here. see? whatever you’re          
planning, bear that in mind.”                                                     
the room rippled violently, as if i were standing in the midst of an              
unframed painting someone had just decided to give a shake, to crinkle and        
then draw taut.                                                                   
“well?”                                                                           
nothing.                                                                          
then, a chuckle.                                                                  
“my mother the hat rack… well, well. hey, thanks, buddy. good show.               
couldn’t reach you earlier. didn’t know you’d gone in. they slaughtered           
us. took some mercs in on hang gliders, rode the thermals. they were              
ready, though. took us out. don’t remember exactly then… hurts!”                  
“you okay?”                                                                       
there came something like a sob, just as random and droppa entered                
the hall, the lank form of benedict silent as death at their back.                
“merle!” random called to me. “what’s going on?”                                  
i shook my head. “don’t know,” i said.                                            
“sure, i’ll buy you a drink,” luke’s voice came very faintly.                     
a fiery blizzard swept through the center of the hall. it lasted only a           
moment, and then a large rectangle appeared in its place.                         
“you’re the sorcerer,” random said. “do something!”                               
“i don’t know what the hell it is,” i replied. “i’ve never seen anything          
like it. it’s like magic gone wild.”                                              
an outline began to appear within the rectangle, human. its form settled          
and took on features, garments… it was a trump—a giant trump—hanging              
in the middle of the air, solidifying. it was me. i regarded my own features      
and they looked back at me. i noted that i was smiling.                           
“c’mon, merle. join the party,” i heard luke say, and the trump began             
to rotate slowly upon its vertical axis.                                          
sounds, as of glass bells, filled the hall.                                       
the huge card turned until i viewed it edge-on, a black slash. then the           
dark line widened with a ripple, like parting curtains, and i saw colored         
patches of intense light sliding beyond it. i also saw the caterpillar, puffing   
on a hookah, and fat umbrellas and a bright, shiny rail.                          
a hand emerged from the slit. “right this way.”                                   
i heard a sharp intake of breath from random.                                     
benedict’s blade was suddenly pointed at the tableau. but random laid             
his hand on his shoulder and said, “no.”                                          
there was a strange, disconnected sort of music hanging in the air now;           
it seemed somehow appropriate.                                                    
“c’mon, merle.”                                                                   
“you coming or going?” i asked.                                                   
“both.”                                                                           
“you made me a promise, luke: a piece of information for your                     
mother’s rescue,” i said. “well, i’ve got her here. what’s the secret?”           
“something vital to your well-being?” he asked slowly.                            
“vital to the safety of amber is what you’d said.”                                
“oh, that secret.”                                                                
“i’d be glad to have the other one too.”                                          
“sorry. one secret is all i’m selling. which will it be?”                         
“the safety of amber,” i answered.                                                
“dalt,” he replied.                                                               
“what of him?”                                                                    
“deela the desacratrix was his mother—”                                           
“i already know that.”                                                            
“—and she’d been oberon’s prisoner nine months before he was born.                
he raped her. that’s why dalt’s got it in for you guys.”                          
“bullshit!” i said.                                                               
“that’s what i told him when i’d heard the story one time too many. i             
dared him to walk the pattern in the sky then.”                                   
“and?”                                                                            
“he did.”                                                                         
“oh.”                                                                             
“i just learned that story recently,” random said, “from an emissary i’d          
sent to kashfa. i didn’t know about his taking the pattern, though.”              
“if you knew, i still owe you,” luke said slowly, almost distractedly.            
“okay, here’s more: dalt visited me on the shadow earth after that. he’s the      
one who raided my warehouse, stole a stock of weapons and special ammo.           
burnt the place after that to cover the theft. i found witnesses, though. he’ll   
be along—any time. who knows when?”                                               
“another relative coming to visit,” random said. “why couldn’t i have             
been an only child?”                                                              
“make what you will of it,” luke added. “we’re square now. give me a              
hand!”                                                                            
“you coming through?”                                                             
he laughed, and the whole hall seemed to lurch. the opening in the air            
hung before me and the hand clasped my own. something felt very wrong.            
i tried to draw him to me, but felt myself drawn toward him instead.              
there was a mad power i could not fight, and the universe seemed to               
twist as it took hold of me. constellations parted before me and i saw the        
bright railing again. luke’s booted foot rested upon it.                          
from some distant point to the rear i heard random shouting, “b-                  
twelve! b-twelve! and out!”                                                       
… and then i couldn’t recall what the problem had been. it seemed a               
wonderful place. silly of me to have mistaken the mushrooms for                   
umbrellas, though…                                                                
i put my own foot up on the rail as the hatter poured me a drink and              
topped off luke’s. luke gestured to his left and the march hare got a refill      
too. humpty was fine, balanced there near the end of things. tweedledum,          
tweedledee, the dodo and the frog footman kept the music moving. and              
the caterpillar just kept puffing away.                                           
luke clapped me on the shoulder, and there was something i wanted to              
remember but it kept slipping out of sight.                                       
“i’m okay now,” luke said. “everything’s okay.”                                   
“no, there’s something… i can’t recall…”                                          
he raised his tankard, clanked it against my own. “enjoy!” he said.               
“life is a cabaret, old chum!”                                                    
the cat on the stool beside me just kept grinning.                                
