nine princes in amber                                                            
the first amber pentology - corwin’s story: book 1                               
                                                                    
chapter 1                                                                        
it was starting to end, after what seemed most of eternity to me.                
i attempted to wriggle my toes, succeeded. i was sprawled there in a             
hospital bed and my legs were done up in plaster casts, but they were still      
mine.                                                                            
i squeezed my eyes shut, and opened them, three times.                           
the room grew steady.                                                            
where the hell was i?                                                            
then the fogs were slowly broken, and some of that which is called               
memory returned to me. i recalled nights and nurses and needles. every           
time things would begin to clear a bit, someone would come in and jab me         
with something. that’s how it had been. yes. now, though, i was feeling          
halfway decent. they’d have to stop.                                             
wouldn’t they?                                                                   
the thought came to assail me: maybe not.                                        
some natural skepticism as to the purity of all human motives came and           
sat upon my chest. i’d been over narcotized, i suddenly knew. no real            
reason for it, from the way i felt, and no reason for them to stop now, if       
they’d been paid to keep it up. so play it cool and stay dopey, said a voice     
which was my worst, if wiser, self.                                              
so i did.                                                                        
a nurse poked her head in the door about ten minutes later, and i was,           
of course, still sacking z’s. she went away.                                     
by then, i’d reconstructed a bit of what had occurred                            
i had been in some sort of accident, i remembered vaguely. what had              
happened after that was still a blur; and as to what had happened before, i      
had no inkling whatsoever. but i had first been in a hospital and then           
brought to this place, i remembered. why? i didn’t know.                         
however, my legs felt pretty good. good enough to hold me up, though             
i didn’t know how much time had lapsed since their breaking—and i knew           
they’d been broken.                                                              
so i sat up. it took me a real effort, as my muscles were very tired. it         
was dark outside and a handful of stars were standing naked beyond the           
window. i winked back at them and threw my legs over the edge of the bed.        
i was dizzy, but after a while it subsided and i got up, gripping the rail       
at the head of the bed, and i took my first step.                                
okay. my legs held me.                                                           
so, theoretically, i was in good enough shape to walk out.                       
i made it back to the bed, stretched out and thought. i was sweating and         
shaking. visions of sugarplums, etc.                                             
in the state of denmark there was the odor of decay…                             
it had been an accident involving an auto, i recalled. one helluva one…          
then the door opened, letting in light, and through slits beneath my             
eyelashes i saw a nurse with a hypo in her hand.                                 
she approached my bedside, a hippy broad with dark hair and big arms.            
just as she neared, i sat up.                                                    
“good evening,” i said.                                                          
“why–good evening,” she replied.                                                 
“when do i check out?” i asked.                                                  
“i’ll have to ask doctor.”                                                       
“do so,” i said.                                                                 
“please roll up your sleeve.”                                                    
“no thanks.”                                                                     
“i have to give you an injection”                                                
“no you don’t. i don’t need it”                                                  
“i’m afraid that’s for doctor to say.”                                           
“then send him around and let him say it. but in the meantime, i will            
not permit it.”                                                                  
“i’m afraid i have my orders.”                                                   
“so did eichmann, and look what happened to him,” and i shook my                 
head slowly.                                                                     
“very well,” she said. “i’ll have to report this…                                
“please do,” i said, “and while you’re at it, tell him i’ve decided to           
check out in the morning.”                                                       
“that’s impossible. you can’t even walk—and there were internal                  
injuries…”                                                                       
“we’ll see,” said i. “good night”                                                
she swished out of sight without answering.                                      
so i lay there and mulled. it seemed i was in some sort of private place         
—so somebody was footing the bill. whom did i know? no visions of                
relatives appeared behind my eyes. friends either. what did that leave?          
enemies?                                                                         
i thought a while.                                                               
nothing.                                                                         
nobody to benefact me thus.                                                      
i’d gone over a cliff in my car, and into a lake, i suddenly remembered.         
and that was all i remembered.                                                   
i was…                                                                           
i strained and began to sweat again.                                             
i didn’t know who i was.                                                         
but to occupy myself, i sat up and stripped away all my bandages. i              
seemed all right underneath them, and it seemed the right thing to do. i         
broke the cast on my right leg, using a metal strut i’d removed from the         
head of the bed. i had a sudden feeling that i had to get out in a hurry, that   
there was something i had to do.                                                 
i tested my right leg. it was okay.                                              
i shattered the cast on my left leg, got up, went to the closet.                 
no clothes there.                                                                
then i heard the footsteps. i returned to my bed and covered over the            
broken casts and the discarded bandages.                                         
the door swung inward once again.                                                
then there was light all around me, and there was a beefy guy in a               
white jacket standing with his hand on the wall switch.                          
“what’s this i hear about you giving the nurse a hard time?” he asked,           
and there was no more feigning sleep.                                            
“i don’t know,” i said. “what is it?”                                            
that troubled him for a second or two, said the frown then, “it’s time           
for your shot.”                                                                  
“are you an m.d.?” i asked.                                                      
“no, but i’m authorized to give you a shot”                                      
“and i refuse it” i said, “as i’ve a legal right to do. what’s it to you?”       
“you’ll have your shot,” he said, as he moved around to the left side of         
the bed. he had a hypo in one hand which bad been out of sight till then.        
it was a very foul blow, about four inches below the belt buckle, i’d say,       
and it left him on his knees.                                                    
“____ ____!” he said, after a time.                                              
“come within spitting distance again,” i said, “and see what happens.”           
“we’ve got ways to deal with patients like you,” he gasped.                      
so i knew the time had come to act.                                              
“where are my clothes?” i said.                                                  
“____ ____!” he repeated                                                         
“then i guess i’ll have to take yours. give them to me.”                         
it became boring with the third repetition, so i threw the bedclothes over       
his head and clobbered him with the metal strut.                                 
within two minutes, i’d say, i was garbed all in the color of moby dick          
and vanilla ice cream. ugly.                                                     
i shoved him into the closet and looked out the lattice window. i saw the        
old moon with the new moon in her arms, hovering above a row of                  
poplars. the grass was silvery and sparkled. the night was bargaining            
weakly with the sun. nothing to show, for me, where this place was located.      
i seemed to be on the third floor of the building though, and there was a cast   
square of light off to my left and low, seeming to indicate a first floor        
window with someone awake behind it.                                             
so i left the room and considered the hallway. off to the left, it ended         
against a wall with a latticed window, and there were four more doors, two       
on either side. probably they let upon more doors like my own. i went and        
looked out the window and saw more grounds, more trees, more night,              
nothing new. turning, i headed in the other direction.                           
doors, doors, doors, no lights from under any of them, the only sounds           
my footsteps from the too big borrowed shoes.                                    
laughing boy’s wristwatch told me it was five forty-four. the metal              
strut was inside my belt, under the white orderly jacket, and it rubbed          
against my hip bone as i walked. there was a ceiling fixture about every         
twenty feet, casting about forty watts of light.                                 
i came to a stairway, off to the right, leading down. i took it. it was          
carpeted and quiet.                                                              
the second floor looked like my own, rows of rooms, so i continued on.           
when i reached the first floor i turned right, looking for the door with         
light leaking out from beneath it.                                               
i found it, way up near the end of the corridor, and i didn’t bother to          
knock.                                                                           
the guy was sitting there in a garish bathrobe, at a big shiny desk, going       
over some sort of ledger. this was no ward room. he looked up at me with         
burning eyes all wide and lips swelling toward a yell they didn’t reach,         
perhaps because of my determined expression. he stood, quickly.                  
i shut the door behind me, advanced, and said:                                   
“good morning. you’re in trouble.”                                               
people must always be curious as to trouble, because after the three             
seconds it took me to cross the room, his words were:                            
“what do you mean?”                                                              
“i mean,” i said, “that you’re about to suffer a lawsuit for holding me          
incommunicado, and another one for malpractice, for your indiscriminate          
use of narcotics. i’m already suffering withdrawal symptoms and might do         
something violent…”                                                              
he stood up.                                                                     
“get out of here,” he said.                                                      
i saw a pack of cigarettes on his desk. i helped myself and said, “sit           
down and shut up. we’ve got things to talk about.”                               
he sat down, but he didn’t shut up:                                              
“you’re breaking several regulations,” he said.                                  
“so we’ll let a court decide who’s liable,” i replied. “i want my clothes        
and my personal effects. i’m checking out…”                                      
“you’re in no condition—”                                                        
“nobody asked you. pony up this minute, or answer to the law.”                   
he reached toward a button on his desk, but i slapped his hand away.             
“now!” i repeated. “you should have pressed that when i came in. it’s            
too late now.”                                                                   
“mr. corey, you’re being most difficult…”                                        
corey?                                                                           
“i didn’t check me in here,” i said, “but i damn well have a right to            
check me out. and now’s the time. so let’s get about it.”                        
“obviously, you’re in no condition to leave this institution,” he replied.       
“i cannot permit it—i am going to call for someone to escort you back to         
your room and put you to bed.”                                                   
“don’t try it,” i said, “or you’ll find out what condition i’m in. now,          
i’ve several questions. the first one’s who checked me in, and who’s             
footing my bill at this place?”                                                  
“very well,” he sighed, and his tiny, sandy mustaches sagged as low as           
they could.                                                                      
he opened a drawer, put his hand inside, and i was wary.                         
i knocked it down before he had the safety catch off: a .32 automatic,           
very neat; colt. i snapped the catch myself when i retrieved it from the desk    
top; and i pointed it and said: “you will answer my questions. obviously         
you consider me dangerous. you may be right.”                                    
he smiled weakly, lit a cigarette himself, which was a mistake, if he            
intended to indicate aplomb. his hands shook.                                    
“all right, corey–if it will make you happy,” he said, “your sister              
checked you in”                                                                  
“?” thought i.                                                                   
“which sister?” i asked.                                                         
“evelyn,” he said.                                                               
no bells. so, “that’s ridiculous. i haven’t seen evelyn in years,” i said.       
“she didn’t even know i was in this part of the country.”                        
he shrugged.                                                                     
“nevertheless…”                                                                  
“where’s she staying now? i want to call her,” i said.                           
“i don’t have her address handy.”                                                
“get it.”                                                                        
he rose, crossed to a filing cabinet, opened it, riffled, withdrew a card.       
i studied it. mrs. evelyn flaumel… the new york address was not                  
familiar either. but i committed it to memory. as the card said, my first        
name was carl. good. more data.                                                  
i stuck the gun in my belt beside the strut then, safety back on, of             
course.                                                                          
“okay,” i told him. “where are my clothes, and what’re you going to              
pay me?”                                                                         
“your clothes were destroyed in the accident,” he said, “and i must tell         
you that your legs were definitely broken–the left one in two places.            
frankly, i can’t see how you’re managing to stay on your feet. it’s only         
been two weeks—”                                                                 
“i always heal fast,” i said. “now, about the money…                             
“what money?”                                                                    
“the out-of-court settlement for my malpractice complaint. and the               
other one.”                                                                      
“don’t be ridiculous!”                                                           
“who’s being ridiculous? i’ll settle for a thousand, cash, right now.”           
“i won’t even discuss such a thing.”                                             
“well, you’d better consider it—and win or lose, think about the name it         
will give this place if i manage enough pretrial publicity. i’ll certainly get in
touch with the ama, the newspapers. the—”                                        
“blackmail,” he said, “and i’ll have nothing to do with it.”                     
“pay now, or pay later, after a court order,” i said. “i don’t care. but it’ll   
be cheaper this way.”                                                            
if he came across, i’d know my guesses were right and there was                  
something crooked involved.                                                      
he glared at me, i don’t know how long.                                          
finally, “i haven’t got a thousand here,” he said.                               
“name a compromise figure,” i said.                                              
after another pause, “it’s larceny.”                                             
“not if it’s cash-and-carry, charlie. so, call it.”                              
“i might have five hundred in my safe.”                                          
“get it.”                                                                        
he told me, after inspecting the contents of a small wall safe, there was        
four-thirty, and i didn’t want to leave fingerprints on the safe just to check   
him out. so i accepted and stuffed the bills into my side pocket.                
“now what’s the nearest cab company that serves this place?”                     
he named it, and i checked in the phone book, which told me i was                
upstate.                                                                         
i made him dial it and call me a cab, because i didn’t know the name of          
the place and didn’t want him to know the condition of my memory. one of         
the bandages i had removed had been around my head.                              
while he was making the arrangement i heard him name the place: it               
was called greenwood private hospital.                                           
i snubbed out my cigarette, picked up another, and removed perhaps               
two hundred pounds from my feet by resting in a brown upholstered chair          
beside his bookcase.                                                             
“we wait here and you’ll see me to the door,” i said.                            
i never heard another word out of him.                                           
                                                                    
chapter 2                                                                        
it was about eight o’clock when the cab deposited me on a random corner          
in the nearest town. i paid off the driver and walked for around twenty          
minutes. then i stopped in a diner, found a booth and had juice, a couple of     
eggs, toast, bacon and three cups of coffee. the bacon was too greasy.           
after giving breakfast a good hour, i started walking, found a clothing          
store, and waited till its nine-thirty opening.                                  
i bought a pair of slacks, three sport shirts, a belt, some underwear, and       
a pair of shoes that fit. i also picked up a handkerchief, a wallet, and pocket  
comb.                                                                            
then i found a greyhound station and boarded a bus for new york. no              
one tried to stop me. no one seemed to be looking for me.                        
sitting there, watching the countryside all autumn-colored and tickled           
by brisk winds beneath a bright, cold sky, i reviewed everything i knew          
about myself and my circumstances.                                               
i had been registered at greenwood as carl corey by my sister evelyn             
flaumel. this had been subsequent to an auto accident some fifteen or so         
days past, in which i had suffered broken bones which no longer troubled         
me. i didn’t remember sister evelyn. the greenwood people had been               
instructed to keep me passive, were afraid of the law when i got loose and       
threatened them with it. okay. someone was afraid of me, for some reason.        
i’d play it for all it was worth.                                                
i forced my mind back to the accident, dwelled upon it till my head              
hurt. it was no accident. i had that impression, though i didn’t know why. i     
would find out, and someone would pay. very, very much would they pay.           
an anger, a terrible one, flared within the middle of my body. anyone who        
tried to hurt me, to use me, did so at his own peril and now he would            
receive his due, whoever he was, this one. i felt a strong desire to kill, to    
destroy whoever had been responsible, and i knew that it was not the first       
time in my life that i had felt this thing, and i knew, too, that i had followed 
through on it in the past. more than once.                                       
i stared out the window, watching the dead leaves fall.                          
when i hit the big city, the first thing i did was to get a shave and            
haircut in the nearest clip joint, and the second was to change my shirt and     
undershirt in the men’s room, because i can’t stand hair down my back. the       
.32 automatic, belonging to the nameless individual at greenwood, was in         
my right-hand jacket pocket. i suppose that if greenwood or my sister            
wanted me picked up in a hurry, a sullivan violation would come in handy.        
but i decided to hang onto it. they’d have to find me first, and i wanted a      
reason. i ate a quick lunch, rode subways and buses for an hour, then got a      
cab to take me out to the westchester address of evelyn, my nominal sister       
and hopeful jogger of memories.                                                  
before i arrived, i’d already decided on the tack i’d take.                      
so, when the door to the huge old place opened in response to my                 
knock, after about a thirty-second wait, i knew what i was going to say. i       
had thought about it as i’d walked up the long, winding, white gravel            
driveway, between the dark oaks and the bright maples, leaves crunching          
beneath my feet, and the wind cold on my fresh-scraped neck within the           
raised collar of my jacket. the smell of my hair tonic mingled with a musty      
odor from the ropes of ivy that crowded all over the walls of that old, brick    
place. there was no sense of familiarity. i didn’t think i had ever been here    
before.                                                                          
i had knocked, and there had come an echo.                                       
then i’d jammed my hands into my pockets and waited.                             
when the door opened, i had smiled and nodded toward the mole-                   
flecked maid with a swarthy complexion and a puerto rican accent.                
“yes?” she said.                                                                 
“i’d like to see mrs. evelyn flaumel, please.”                                   
“who shall i say is calling?”                                                    
“her brother carl.”                                                              
“oh come in please,” she told me.                                                
i entered a hallway, the floor a mosaic of tiny salmon and turquoise             
tiles, the wall mahogany, a trough of big-leafed green things occupying a        
room divider to my left. from overhead, a cube of glass and enamel threw         
down a yellow light.                                                             
the gal departed, and i sought around me for something familiar.                 
nothing.                                                                         
so i waited.                                                                     
presently, the maid returned, smiled, nodded, and said, “please follow           
me. she will see you in the library.”                                            
i followed, up three stairs and down a corridor past two closed doors,           
the third one to my left was open, and the maid indicated i should enter it. i   
did so, then paused on the threshold.                                            
like all libraries, it was full of books. it also held three paintings, two      
indicating quiet landscapes and one a peaceful seascape. the floor was           
heavily carpeted in green. there was a big globe beside the big desk with        
africa facing me and a wall-to-wall window behind it, eight stepladders of       
glass. but none of these was the reason i’d paused.                              
the woman behind the desk wore a wide-collared, v-necked dress of                
blue-green, had long hair and low bangs, all of a cross between sunset           
clouds and the outer edge of a candle flame in an otherwise dark room, and       
natural, i somehow knew, and her eyes behind glasses i didn’t think she          
needed were as blue as lake erie at three o’clock on a cloudless summer          
afternoon; and the color of her compressed smile matched her hair. but           
none of these was the reason i’d paused.                                         
i knew her, from somewhere, though i couldn’t say where.                         
i advanced, holding my own smile.                                                
“hello,” i said.                                                                 
“sit down,” said she, “please,” indicating a high-backed, big-armed              
chair that bulged and was orange, of the kind just tilted at the angle in        
which i loved to loaf.                                                           
i did so, and she studied me.                                                    
“glad to see you’re up and around again.”                                        
“me, too. how’ve you been?”                                                      
“fine, thank you. i must say i didn’t expect to see you here.”                   
“i know,” i fibbed, “but here i am, to thank you for your sisterly               
kindness and care.” i let a slight note of irony sound within the sentence just  
to observe her response.                                                         
at that point an enormous dog entered the room–an irish wolfhound–               
and it curled up in front of the desk. another followed and circled the globe    
twice before lying down.                                                         
“well,” said she, returning the irony, “it was the least i could do for you.     
you should drive more carefully.”                                                
“in the future,” i said, “i’ll take greater precautions, i promise.” i didn’t    
now what sort of game i was playing, but since she didn’t know that i didn’t     
know, i’d decided to take her for all the information i could. “i figured you    
would be curious as to the shape i was in, so i came to let you see.”            
“i was,… am,” she replied. “have you eaten?”                                     
“a light lunch, several hours ago.” i said.                                      
so she rang up the maid and ordered food. then “i thought you might              
take it upon yourself to leave greenwood,” she said, “when you were able, i      
didn’t think it would be so soon, though, and i didn’t think you’d come          
here.”                                                                           
“i know,” i said, “that’s why i did.”                                            
she offered me a cigarette and i took it, lit hers, lit mine.                    
“you always were unpredictable,” she finally told me. “while this has            
helped you often in the past, however, i wouldn’t count on it now.”              
“what do you mean?” i said.                                                      
“the stakes are far too high for a bluff, and i think that’s what you’re         
trying, walking in here like this. i’ve always admired your courage, corwin,     
but don’t be a fool. you know the score.”                                        
corwin? file it away, under “corey.”                                             
“maybe i don’t,” i said. “i’ve been asleep for a while, remember?”               
“you mean you haven’t been in touch?”                                            
“haven’t had a chance, since i woke up.”                                         
she leaned her head to one side and narrowed her wonderful eyes.                 
“rash,” she said, “but possible. just possible. you might mean it. you           
might. i’ll pretend that you do, for now. in that case, you may have done a      
smart safe thing. let me think about it.”                                        
i drew on my cigarette, hoping she’d say something more. but she                 
didn’t, so i decided to seize what seemed the advantage i’d obtained in this     
game i didn’t understand with players i didn’t know for stakes i had no          
inkling of.                                                                      
“the fact that i’m here indicates something,” i said.                            
“yes,” she replied, “i know. but you’re smart, so it could indicate more         
than one thing. we’ll wait and see.”                                             
wait for what? see what? thing?                                                  
steaks then arrived and a pitcher of beer, so i was temporarily freed            
from the necessity of making cryptic and general statements for her to           
ponder as subtle or cagey. mine was a good steak, pink inside and full of        
juice, and i tore at the fresh tough-crested bread with my teeth and gulped      
the beer with a great hunger and a thirst. she laughed as she watched me,        
while cutting off tiny pieces of her own.                                        
“i love the gusto with which you assail life, corwin. it’s one of the            
reasons i’d hate to see you part company with it.”                               
“me, too,” i muttered.                                                           
and while i ate, i pondered her. i saw her in a low-cut gown, green as           
the green of the sea, with full skirts. there was music, dancing, voices         
behind us. i wore black and silver and… the vision faded. but it was a true      
piece of my memory, i knew; and inwardly i cursed that i lacked it in its        
entirety. what had she been saying, in her green, to me in my black and          
silver, that night, behind the music, the dancing and the voices?                
i poured us more beer from the pitcher and decided to test the vision.           
“i remember one night,” i said, “when you were all in green and i in my          
colors. how lovely things seemed–and the music…”                                 
her face grew slightly wistful, the cheeks smoothing.                            
“yes,” she said. “were not those the days?… you really have not been             
in touch?”                                                                       
“word of honor,” i said, for whatever that was worth.                            
“things have grown far worse,” she said, “and the shadows contain                
more horrors than any had thought…”                                              
“and…?” i inquired.                                                              
“he still has his troubles,” she finished.                                       
“oh.”                                                                            
“yes,” she went on, “and he’ll want to know where you stand.”                    
“right here,” i said.                                                            
“you mean…”                                                                      
“for now,” i told her, perhaps too quickly, for her eyes had widened too         
much, “since i still don’t know the full state of affairs,” whatever that        
meant.                                                                           
“oh.”                                                                            
and we finished our steaks and the beer, giving the two bones to the             
dogs.                                                                            
we sipped some coffee afterward, and i came to feel a bit brotherly but          
suppressed it. i asked, “what of the others?” which could mean anything,         
but sounded safe.                                                                
i was afraid for a moment that she was going to ask me what i meant.             
instead, though, she leaned back in her chair, stared at the ceiling, and said,  
“as always, no one new has been heard from. perhaps yours was the wisest         
way. i’m enjoying it myself. but how can one forget–the glory?”                  
i lowered my eyes, because i wasn’t sure what they should contain.               
“one can’t,” i said. “one never can.”                                            
there followed a long, uncomfortable silence, after which she said: “do          
you hate me?”                                                                    
“of course not,” i replied. “how could i–all things considered?”                 
this seemed to please her, and she showed her teeth, which were very             
white.                                                                           
“good, and thank you,” she said. “whatever else, you’re a gentleman.”            
i bowed and smirked.                                                             
“you’ll turn my head.”                                                           
“hardly,” she said, “all things considered.”                                     
and i felt uncomfortable.                                                        
my anger was there, and i wondered whether she knew who it was that i            
needed to stay it. i felt that she did. i fought with the desire to ask it       
outright, suppressed it.                                                         
“well, what do you propose doing?” she finally asked, and being on the           
spot i replied, “of course, you don’t trust me…”                                 
“how could we?”                                                                  
i determined to remember that we.                                                
“well, then. for the time being. i’m willing to place myself under your          
surveillance. i’ll be glad to stay right here, where you can keep an eye on      
me.”                                                                             
“and afterward?”                                                                 
“afterward? we’ll see.”                                                          
“clever,” she said, “very clever. and you place me in an awkward                 
position.” (i had said it because i didn’t have any place else to go. and my     
blackmail money wouldn’t last me too long.) “yes, of course you may stay.        
but let me warn you”–and here she fingered what i had thought to be some         
sort of pendant on a chain about her neck–“this is an ultrasonic dog whistle.    
donner and blitzen here have four brothers, and they’re all trained to take      
care of nasty people and they all respond to my whistle. so don’t start to       
walk toward any place where you won’t be desired. a toot or two and even         
you will go down before them. their kind is the reason there are no wolves       
left in ireland. you know.”                                                      
“i know,” i said, realizing that i did.                                          
“yes.” she continued, “eric will like it that you are my guest. it should        
cause him to leave you alone, which is what you want, n’est-ce-pas?”             
“oui.” i said.                                                                   
eric! it meant something! i had known an eric, and it had been very              
important, somehow. that i did. not recently. but the eric i had known was       
still around, and that was important.                                            
why?                                                                             
i hated him, that was one reason. hated him enough to have                       
contemplated killing him. perhaps i’d even tried.                                
also, there was some bond between us, i knew.                                    
kinship?                                                                         
yes, that was it. neither of us liked it being brothers.                         
… i remembered, i remembered…                                                    
big, powerful eric, with his wet curly beard, and his eyes—just like             
evelyn’s!                                                                        
i was racked with a new surge of memory, as my temples began to throb            
and the back of my neck was suddenly warm.                                       
i didn’t let any of it show on my face, but forced myself to take another        
drag on my cigarette, another sip of beer, as i realized that evelyn was         
indeed my sister! only evelyn wasn’t her name. i couldn’t think of what it       
was, but it wasn’t evelyn. i’d be careful, i resolved. i’d not use any name at   
all when addressing her, until i remembered.                                     
and what of me? and what was it that was going on around me?                     
eric, i suddenly felt, had had some connection with my accident. it              
should have been a fatal one, only i’d pulled through. he was the one,           
wasn’t he? yes, my feelings replied. it had to be eric. and evelyn was           
working with him, paying greenwood to keep me in a coma. better than             
being dead, but…                                                                 
i realized that i had just somehow delivered myself into eric’s hands by         
coming to evelyn, and i would be his prisoner, would be open to new              
attack, if i stayed.                                                             
but she had suggested that my being her guest would cause him to leave           
me alone. i wondered. i couldn’t take anything at face value. i’d have to be     
constantly on my guard. perhaps it would be better if i just went away, let      
my memories return gradually.                                                    
but there was this terrible sense of urgency. i had to find out the full         
story as soon as possible and act as soon as i knew it. it lay like a            
compulsion upon me. if danger was the price of memory and risk the cost          
of opportunity, then so be it. i’d stay.                                         
“and i remember,” evelyn said, and i realized that she had been talking          
for a while and i hadn’t even been listening. perhaps it was because of the      
reflective quality of her words, not really requiring any sort of response—      
and because of the urgency of my thoughts.                                       
“and i remember the day you beat julian at his favorite game and he              
threw a glass of wine at you and cursed you. but you took the prize. and he      
was suddenly afraid he had gone too far. but you laughed then, though, and       
drank a glass with him. i think he felt badly over that show of temper,          
normally being so cool, and i think he was envious of you that day. do you       
recall? i think he has, to a certain extent, imitated many of your ways since    
then. but i still hate him and hope that he goes down shortly. i feel he         
will…”                                                                           
julian, julian, julian. yes and no. something about a game and my                
baiting a man and shattering an almost legendary self-control. yes, there        
was a feeling of familiarity; and no, i couldn’t really say for certain what all 
had been involved.                                                               
“and caine, how you gulled him! he hates you yet, you know…”                     
i gathered i wasn’t very well liked. somehow, the feeling pleased me.            
and caine, too, sounded familiar. very.                                          
eric, julian, caine, corwin. the names swam around in my head, and in            
a way, it was too much to hold within me.                                        
“it’s been so long…” i said, almost involuntarily, and it seemed to be           
true.                                                                            
“corwin,” she said, “let’s not fence. you want more than security, i             
know that. and you’re still strong enough to get something out of this, if       
you play your hand just right. i can’t guess what you have in mind, but          
maybe we can make a deal with eric.” the we had obviously shifted. she           
had come to some sort of conclusion as to my worth in whatever was going         
on. she saw a chance to gain something for herself, i could tell. i smiled,      
just a little. “is that why you came here?” she continued. “do you have a        
proposal for eric, something which might require a go-between?”                  
“i may,” i replied, “after i’ve thought about it some more. i’ve still so        
recently recovered that i have much pondering to do. i wanted to be in the       
best place, though, where i could act quickly, if i decided my best interests    
lay with eric.”                                                                  
“take care,” she said. “you know i’ll report every word.”                        
“of course,” i said, not knowing that at all and groping for a quick             
hedge, “unless your best interests were conjoined with my own.”                  
her eyebrows moved closer together, and tiny wrinkles appeared                   
between them.                                                                    
“i’m not sure what you’re proposing.”                                            
“i’m not proposing anything, yet,” i said. “i’m just being completely            
open and honest with you and telling you i don’t know. i’m not positive i        
want to make a deal with eric. after all…” i let the words trail off on          
purpose, for i had nothing to follow them with, though i felt i should.          
“you’ve been offered an alternative?” she stood up suddenly, seizing             
her whistle. “bleys! of course!”                                                 
“sit down,” i said, “and don’t he ridiculous. would i place myself in            
your hands this calmly, this readily, just to be dog meat because you happen     
to think of bleys?”                                                              
she relaxed, maybe even sagged a little, then reseated herself.                  
“possibly not,” she finally said, “but i know you’re a gambler, and i            
know you’re treacherous. if you came here to dispose of a partisan, don’t        
even bother trying. i’m not that important. you should know that by now.         
besides, i always thought you rather liked me.”                                  
“i did, and i do,” i said, “and you have nothing to worry about, so don’t.       
it’s interesting, though, that you should mention bleys.”                        
bait, bait, bait! there was so much i wanted to know!                            
“why? has he approached you?”                                                    
“i’d rather not say,” i replied, hoping it would give me an edge of some         
kind, and now that i knew bleys’ gender: “if he had, i’d have answered him       
the same as i would eric–‘i’ll think about it’.”                                 
“bleys,” she repeated, and bleys, i said to myself inside my head,               
bleys. i like you. i forget why, and i know there are reasons why i              
shouldn’t–but i like you. i know it.                                             
we sat awhile, and i felt fatigue but didn’t want to show it. i should be        
strong. i knew i had to be strong.                                               
i sat there and smiled and said, “nice library you’ve got here,” and she         
said, “thank you.”                                                               
“bleys,” she repeated after a time. “do you really think he has a                
chance?”                                                                         
i shrugged.                                                                      
“who knows? not i, for certain. maybe he does. maybe not, too.”                  
then she stared at me, her eyes slightly wide, and her mouth opening.            
“not you?” she said, “you’re not proposing to try yourself, are you?”            
i laughed then, solely for purposes of countering her emotion.                   
“don’t he silly,” i said when i’d finished. “me?”                                
but as she said it, i knew she’d struck some chord, some deep-buried             
thing which replied with a powerful “why not?”                                   
i was suddenly afraid.                                                           
she seemed relieved, though, at my disavowal of whatever it was i was            
disavowing. she smiled then, and indicated a built-in bar off to my left.        
“i’d like a little irish mist,” she said.                                        
“so would i, for that matter,” i replied, and i rose and fetched two.            
“you know,” i said, after i’d reseated myself, “it’s pleasant to be              
together with you this way, even if it is only for a short time. it brings back  
memories.”                                                                       
and she smiled and was lovely.                                                   
“you’re right,” she said, sipping her drink. “i almost feel in amber with        
you around,” and i almost dropped my drink.                                      
amber! the word had sent a bolt of lightning down my spine!                      
then she began to cry, and i rose and put my arm around her shoulders            
to comfort her.                                                                  
“don’t cry, little girl. please don’t. it makes me unhappy, too.” amber!         
there was something there, something electrical and potent! “there will be       
good days once again.” i said, softly.                                           
“do you really believe that?” she asked.                                         
“yes,” i said loudly. “yes, i do!”                                               
“you’re crazy,” she said. “maybe that’s why you were always my                   
favorite brother too. i can almost believe anything you say, even though i       
know you’re crazy.” then she cried a little more and stopped.                    
“corwin,” she said, “if you do make it—if by some wild and freakish              
chance out of shadow you should make it—will you remember your little            
sister florimel?”                                                                
“yes,” i said, knowing it to be her name. “yes, i will remember you.”            
“thank you. i will tell eric only the essentials, and mention bleys not at       
all, nor my latest suspicions.”                                                  
“thank you, flora.”                                                              
“but i don’t trust you worth a damn,” she added. “remember that, too.”           
“that goes without saying.”                                                      
then she summoned her maid to show me to a room, and i managed to                
undress, collapsed into the bed, and slept for eleven hours.                     
                                                                    
chapter 3                                                                        
in the morning she was gone, and there was no message. her maid served           
me breakfast in the kitchen and went away to do maid-things. i’d                 
disregarded the notion of trying to pump information out of the woman, as        
she either wouldn’t know or wouldn’t tell me the things i wanted to know         
and would no doubt also report my attempt to flora. so, since it seemed i        
had the nun of the house, i decided i’d return to the library and see what i     
could learn there. besides, i like libraries. it makes me feel comfortable and   
secure to have walls of words, beautiful and wise, all around me. i always       
feel better when i can see that there is something to hold back the shadows.     
donner or blitzen, or one of their relatives, appeared from somewhere            
and followed me up the hallway, walking stiff-legged and sniffing after my       
spoor. i tried to make friends with him, but it was like exchanging              
pleasantries with the state trooper who signaled you to pull off the road. i     
looked into some of the other rooms as i went along, and they were just          
places. innocuous-looking ones.                                                  
so i entered the library, and africa still faced me. i closed the door           
behind me to keep the dogs out, and i strolled around the room. reading the      
titles on the shelves.                                                           
there were lots of history books. in fact, they seemed to dominate her           
collection. there were also many art books, of the big and expensive             
variety, and i leafed through a few of these. i usually do my best real          
thinking when i’m thinking about something else.                                 
i wondered at the sources of flora’s obvious wealth. if we were related,         
did that mean that perhaps i enjoyed somewhat of opulence, also? i thought       
about my economic and social status, my profession, my origins. i had the        
feeling that i’d never worried much about money, and that there’d always         
been enough or ways of getting it, to keep me satisfied. did i own a big         
house like this? i couldn’t remember.                                            
what did i do?                                                                   
i sat behind her desk and examined my mind for any special caches of             
knowledge i might possess. it is difficult to examine yourself this way, as a    
stranger. maybe that’s why i couldn’t come up with anything. what’s yours        
is yours and a part of you and it just seems to belong there, inside. that’s     
all.                                                                             
a doctor? that came to mind as i was viewing some of da vinci’s                  
anatomical drawings. almost by reflex, in my mind, i had begun going             
through the steps of various surgical operations. i realized then that i had     
operated on people in the past.                                                  
but that wasn’t it. while i realized that i had a medical background, i          
knew that it was a part of something else. i knew, somehow, that i was not a     
practicing surgeon. what then? what else was involved?                           
something caught my eye.                                                         
seated there at the desk, i commanded a view of the far wall. on which,          
among other things, hung an antique cavalry saber, which i had overlooked        
the first time around the room. i rose and crossed over to it, took it down      
from its pegs.                                                                   
in my mind, i tsked at the shape it was in. i wanted an oily rag and a           
whetstone, to make it the way it should he once again. i knew something          
about antique arms, edged weapons in particular.                                 
the saber felt light and useful in my hand, and i felt capable with it. i        
struck an en garde. i parried and cut a few times. yes. i could use the thing.   
so what sort of background was that? i looked around for new memory              
joggers.                                                                         
nothing else occurred to me, so i replaced the blade and returned to the         
desk. sitting there, i decided to go through the thing.                          
i started with the middle one and worked my way up the left side and             
down the right, drawer by drawer.                                                
stationery, envelopes, postage stamps, paper clips, pencil stubs, rubber         
bands—all the usual items.                                                       
i had pulled each drawer all the way out though, and held it in my lap as        
i’d inspected its contents. it wasn’t just an idea. it was part of some sort of  
training i’d once received, which told me i should inspect the sides and         
bottoms as well.                                                                 
one thing almost slipped by me, but caught my attention at the last              
instant: the back of the lower right-hand drawer did not rise as high as the     
backs of the other drawers.                                                      
this indicated something. and when i knelt and looked inside the                 
drawer space i saw a little box-like affair fixed to the upper side.             
it was a small drawer itself, way in the back, and it was locked.                
it took me about a minute of fooling around with paper clips, safety             
pins, and finally a metal shoehorn i’d seen in another drawer. the shoehorn      
did the trick.                                                                   
the drawer contained a packet of playing cards.                                  
and the packet bore a device which caused me to stiffen where i knelt,           
perspiration suddenly wetting my brow and my breath coming rapidly.              
it bore a white unicorn on a grass field, rampant, facing to the dexter.         
and i knew that device and it hurt me that i could not name it.                  
i opened the packet and extracted the cards. they were on the order of           
tarots, with their wands, pentacles, cups, and swords, but the greater           
trumps were quite different.                                                     
i replaced both drawers, being careful not to lock the smaller one,              
before i continued my inspection.                                                
they were almost lifelike in appearance, the greater trumps ready to             
step right out through those glistening surfaces. the cards seemed quite         
cold to my touch, and it gave me a distinct pleasure to handle them. i had       
once had a packet like this myself, i suddenly knew.                             
i began spreading them on the blotter before me. the one bore a wily-            
looking little man, with a sharp nose and a laughing mouth and a shock of        
straw-colored hair. he was dressed in something like a renaissance               
costume of orange, red and brown. he wore long hose and a tight-fitting          
embroidered doublet. and i knew him. his name was random.                        
next, there was the passive countenance of julian, dark hair hanging             
long, blue eyes containing neither passion nor compassion. he was dressed        
completely in scaled white armor, not silver or metallic-colored, but looking    
as if it had been enameled. i knew, though, that it was terribly tough and       
shock-resistant, despite its decorative and festive appearance. he was the       
man i had beaten at his favorite game, for which he had thrown a glass of        
wine at me. i knew him and i hated him.                                          
then came the swarthy, dark-eyed countenance of caine, dressed all in            
satin that was black and green, wearing a dark three-cornered hat set at a       
rakish angle, a green plume of feathers trailing down the back. he was           
standing in profile, one arm akimbo, and the toes of his boots curled            
upwards, and he wore an emerald-studded dagger at his belt. there was            
ambivalence in my heart.                                                         
then there was eric. handsome by anyone’s standards, his hair was so             
dark as to be almost blue. his beard curled around the mouth that always         
smiled, and he was dressed simply in a leather jacket and leggings, a plain      
cloak, high black boots, and he wore a red sword belt bearing a long silvery     
saber and clasped with a ruby, and his high cloak collar round his head was      
lined with red and the trimmings of his sleeves matched it. his hands,           
thumbs hooked behind his belt, were terribly strong and prominent. a pair        
of black gloves jutted from the belt near his right hip. he it was, i was        
certain, that had tried to kill me on that day i had almost died. i studied him  
and i feared him somewhat.                                                       
then there was benedict, tall and dour, thin, thin of body, thin of face,        
wide of mind. he wore orange and yellow and brown and reminded me of             
haystacks and pumpkins and scarecrows and the legend of sleepy hollow.           
he had a long strong jaw and hazel eyes and brown hair that never curled.        
he stood beside a tan horse and leaned upon a lance about which was              
twined a rope of flowers. he seldom laughed. i liked him.                        
i paused when i uncovered the next card, and my heart leaped forward             
and banged against my sternum and asked to be let out.                           
it was me.                                                                       
i knew the me i shaved and this was the guy behind the mirror. green             
eyes, black hair, dressed in black and silver, yes. i had on a cloak and it was  
slightly furled as by a wind. i had on black boots, like eric’s, and i too wore  
a blade, only mine was heavier, though not quite as long as his. i had my        
gloves on and they were silver and scaled. the clasp at my neck was cast in      
the form of a silver rose.                                                       
me. corwin.                                                                      
and a big, powerful man regarded me from the next card. he resembled             
me quite strongly, save that his jaw was heavier. and i knew he was bigger       
than i, though slower. his strength was a thing out of legend. he wore a         
dressing gown of blue and gray clasped about the middle with a wide, black       
belt, and he stood laughing. about his neck, on a heavy cord, there hung a       
silver hunting horn. he wore a fringe heard and a light mustache. in his         
right hand he held a goblet of wine. i felt a sudden affection for him. his      
name then occurred to me. he was gerard.                                         
then came a fiery bearded, flame-crowned man, dressed all in red and             
orange, mainly of silk stuff, and he held a sword in his right hand and a        
glass of wine in his left, and the devil himself danced behind his eyes, as      
blue as flora’s, or eric’s. his chin was slight, but the beard covered it. his   
sword was inlaid with an elaborate filigree of a golden color. he wore two       
huge rings on his right hand and one on his left: an emerald, a ruby, and a      
sapphire, respectively. this, i knew, was bleys.                                 
then there was a figure both like bley’s and myself. my features,                
though smaller, my eyes, bleys’ hair, beardless. he wore a riding suit of        
green and sat atop a white horse, heading toward the dexter side of the card.    
there was a quality of both strength and weakness, questing and                  
abandonment about him. i both approved and disapproved, liked and was            
repelled by, this one. his name was brand, i knew. as soon as i laid eyes        
upon him, i knew.                                                                
in fact, i realized that i knew them all well, remembered them all, with         
their strengths, their weaknesses, their victories, their defeats.               
for they were my brothers.                                                       
i lit a cigarette i’d filched from flora’s desk box, and i leaned back and       
considered the things i had recalled.                                            
they were my brothers, those eight strange men garbed in their strange           
costumes. and i knew that it was right and fitting that they should dress in     
whatever manner they chose, just as it was right for me to wear the black        
and the silver. then i chuckled, as i realized what i was wearing, what i had    
purchased in the little clothing store of that little town i had stopped in after
my departure from greenwood.                                                     
i had on black slacks, and all three of the shirts i had purchased had           
been of a grayish, silvery color. and my jacket, too, was black.                 
i returned to the cards, and there was flora in a gown green as the sea,         
just as i’d remembered her the previous evening; and then there was a            
black-haired girl with the same blue eyes, and her hair hung long and she        
was dressed all in black, with a girdle of silver about her waist. my eyes       
filled with tears, why i don’t know. her name was deirdre. then there was        
fiona, with hair like bleys or brand, my eyes, and a complexion like             
mother of pearl. i hated her the second i turned over the card. next was         
llewella, whose hair matched her jade-colored eyes, dressed in shimmering        
gray and green with a lavender belt, and looking moist and sad. for some         
reason, i knew she was not like the rest of us. but she, too, was my sister.     
i felt a terrible sense of distance and removal from all these people. yet       
somehow they seemed physically close.                                            
the cards were so very cold on my fingertips that i put them down                
again, though with a certain sense of reluctance at having to relinquish their   
touch.                                                                           
there were no more, though. all the rest were minor cards. and i knew,           
somehow, that somehow, again—ah, somehow!—that several were missing.             
for the life of me, however, i did not know what the missing trumps              
represented.                                                                     
i was strangely saddened by this, and i picked up my cigarette and               
mused.                                                                           
why did all these things rush back so easily when i viewed the cards—            
rush back without dragging their contexts along with them? i knew more           
now than i’d known before, in the way of names and faces. but that was           
about all.                                                                       
i couldn’t figure the significance of the fact that we were all done up in       
cards this way. i had a terribly strong desire to own a pack of them,            
however. if i picked up flora’s. though, i knew she’d spot in a hurry that       
they were missing, and i’d be in trouble. therefore, i put them back in the      
little drawer behind the big drawer and locked them in again. then, god,         
how i racked my brains! but too little avail.                                    
until i recalled a magical word.                                                 
amber.                                                                           
i had been greatly upset by the word on the previous evening. i had              
been sufficiently upset so that i had avoided thinking of it since then. but     
now i courted it. now i rolled it around my mind and examined all the            
associations that sprang up when it struck.                                      
the word was charged with a mighty longing and a massive nostalgia. it           
had, wrapped up inside it, a sense of forsaken beauty, grand achievement.        
and a feeling of power that was terrible and almost ultimate. somehow, the       
word belonged in my vocabulary. somehow, i was part of it and it was a           
part of me. it was a place name, i knew then. it was the name of a place i       
once had known. there came no pictures, though, only emotions.                   
how long i sat so, i do not know. time had somehow divorced itself               
from my reveries.                                                                
i realized then, from the center of my thoughts, that there had come a           
gentle rapping upon the door. then the handle slowly turned and the maid,        
whose name was carmella, entered and asked me if i was interested in             
lunch.                                                                           
it seemed like a good idea, so i followed her back to the kitchen and ate        
half a chicken and drank a quart of milk.                                        
i took a pot of coffee back to the library with me, avoiding the dogs as i       
went. i was into the second cup when the telephone rang.                         
i longed to pick it up, but i figured there must be extensions all over the      
house and carmella would probably get it from somewhere.                         
i was wrong. it kept ringing.                                                    
finally, i couldn’t resist it any longer.                                        
“hello,” i said, “this is the flaumel residence.”                                
“may i speak with mrs. flaumel please?”                                          
it was a man’s voice, rapid and slightly nervous. he sounded out of              
breath and his words were masked and surrounded by the faint ringing and         
the ghost voices that indicate long distance.                                    
“i’m sorry.” i told him. “she’s not here right now. may i take a message         
or have her call you back?”                                                      
“who am i talking to?” he demanded.                                              
i hesitated, then, “corwin’s the name,” i told him.                              
“my god!” he said, and a long silence followed.                                  
i was beginning to think he’d hung up. i said, “hello?” again, just as he        
started talking.                                                                 
“is she still alive?” he asked.                                                  
“of course she’s still alive. who the hell am i talking to?”                     
“don’t you recognize the voice, corwin? this is random. listen. i’m in           
california and i’m in trouble. i was calling to ask flora for sanctuary. are     
you with her?”                                                                   
“temporarily,” i said.                                                           
“i see. will you give me your protection, corwin?” pause, then,                  
“please?”                                                                        
“as much as i can,” i said, “but i can’t commit flora to anything                
without consulting her.”                                                         
“will you protect me against her?”                                               
“yes.”                                                                           
“then you’re good enough for me, man. i’m going to try to make it to             
new york now. i’ll be coming by a rather circuitous route, so i don’t know       
how long it will take me. if i can avoid the wrong shadows, i’ll he seeing       
you whenever. wish me luck.”                                                     
“luck,” i said.                                                                  
then there was a click and i was listening to a distant ringing and the          
voices of the ghosts.                                                            
so cocky little random was in trouble! i had a feeling it shouldn’t have         
bothered me especially. but now, he was one of the keys to my past, and          
quite possibly my future also. so i would try to help him, in any way i          
could, until i’d learned all i wanted from him. i knew that there wasn’t         
much brotherly love lost between the two of us. but i knew that on the one       
hand he was nobody’s fool; he was resourceful, shrewd, strangely                 
sentimental over the damnedest things; and on the other hand, his word           
wasn’t worth the spit behind it, and he’d probably sell my corpse to the         
medical school of his choice if he could get much for it. i remembered the       
little fink all right, with only a touch of affection, perhaps for a few pleasant
times it seemed we had spent together. but trust him? never. i decided i         
wouldn’t tell flora he was coming until the last possible moment. he might       
be made to serve as an ace, or at least a knave, in the hole.                    
so i added some hot coffee to what remained in my cup and sipped it              
slowly.                                                                          
who was he running from?                                                         
not eric, certainly, or he wouldn’t have been calling here. i wondered           
then concerning his question as to whether flora was dead, just because i        
happened to be present here. was she really that strongly allied with the        
brother i knew i hated that it was common knowledge in the family that i’d       
do her in, too, given the chance? it seemed strange, but then he’d asked the     
question.                                                                        
and what was it in which they were allied? what was the source of this           
tension, this opposition? why was it that random was running?                    
amber.                                                                           
that was the answer.                                                             
amber. somehow, the key to everything lay in amber, i knew. the                  
secret of the entire mess was in amber, in some event that had transpired in     
that place, and fairly recently, i’d judge. i’d have to be on my toes. i’d have  
to pretend to the knowledge i didn’t possess, while piece by piece i mined it    
from those who had it. i felt confident that i could do it. there was enough     
distrust circulating for everyone to be cagey. i’d play on that. i’d get what i  
needed and take what i wanted, and i’d remember those who helped me and          
step on the rest. for this, i knew, was the law by which our family lived,       
and i was a true son of my father…                                               
my headache came on again suddenly, throbbing to crack my skull.                 
something about my father i thought, guessed, felt—was what had                  
served to set it off. but i wasn’t sure why or how.                              
after a time, it subsided and i slept, there in the chair. after a much          
longer time, the door opened and flora entered. it was night outside, once       
more.                                                                            
she was dressed in a green silk blouse and a long woolen skirt that was          
gray. she had on walking shoes and heavy stockings. her hair was pulled          
back behind her head and she looked slightly pale. she still wore her hound      
whistle.                                                                         
“good evening,” i said, rising.                                                  
but she did not reply. instead, she walked across the room to the bar,           
poured herself a shot of jack daniels, and tossed it off like a man. then she    
poured another and took it with her to the big chair.                            
i lit a cigarette and handed it to her.                                          
she nodded, then said, “the road to amber—is difficult.”                         
“why?”                                                                           
she gave me a very puzzled look.                                                 
“when is the last time you tried it?”                                            
i shrugged.                                                                      
“i don’t remember.”                                                              
“be that way then,” she said. “i just wondered how much of it was your           
doing.                                                                           
i didn’t reply because i didn’t know what she was talking about. but             
then i recalled that there was an easier way than the road to get to the place   
called amber. obviously, she lacked it.                                          
“you’re missing some trumps,” i said then suddenly, in a voice which             
was almost mine.                                                                 
she sprang to her feet, half her drink spilling over the back of her hand.       
“give them back!” she cried, reaching for the whistle.                           
i moved forward and seized her shoulders.                                        
“i don’t have them,” i said. “i was just making an observation.”                 
she relaxed a bit, then began to cry, and i pushed her back down, gently,        
into the chair.                                                                  
“i thought you meant you’d taken the ones i had left,” she said. “rather         
than just making a nasty and obvious comment.”                                   
i didn’t apologize. it didn’t seem right that i should have to.                  
“how far did you get?”                                                           
“not far at all.” then she laughed and regarded me with a new light in           
her eyes.                                                                        
“i see what you’ve done now, corwin,” she said, and i lit a cigarette in         
order to cover any sort of need for a reply.                                     
“some of those things were yours, weren’t they? you blocked my way               
to amber before you came here, didn’t you? you knew i’d go to eric. but i        
can’t now. i’ll have to wait till he comes to me. clever. you want to draw       
him here, don’t you? he’ll send a messenger, though. he won’t come               
himself.”                                                                        
there was a strange tone of admiration in the voice of this woman who            
was admitting she’d just tried to sell me out to my enemy. and still would—      
given half a chance—as she talked about something she thought i’d done           
which had thrown a monkey wrench into her plans. how could anyone be             
so admittedly machiavellian in the presence of a proposed victim? the            
answer rang back immediately from the depths of my mind. it is the way of        
our kind. we don’t have to be subtle with each other. though i thought she       
lacked somewhat the finesse of a true professional.                              
“do you think i’m stupid, flora?” i asked. “do you think i came here             
just for purposes of waiting around for you to hand me over to erie?             
whatever you ran into, it served you right.”                                     
“all right i don’t play in your league! but you’re in exile, too! that           
shows you weren’t so smart!”                                                     
somehow her words burned and i knew they were wrong.                             
“like hell i am!” i said.                                                        
she laughed again.                                                               
“i knew that would get a rise out of you,” she said. “all right, you walk        
in the shadows on purpose then. you’re crazy.”                                   
i shrugged.                                                                      
she said, “what do you want? why did you really come here?”                      
“i was curious what you were up to,” i said. “that’s all. you can’t keep         
me here if i don’t want to stay. even eric couldn’t do that. maybe i really      
did just want to visit with you. maybe i’m getting sentimental in my old         
age. whatever, i’m going to stay a little longer now, and then probably go       
away for good. if you hadn’t been so quick to see what you could get for         
me, you might have profited a lot more, lady. you asked me to remember           
you one day, if a certain thing occurred…”                                       
it took several seconds for what i thought i was implying to sink in.            
then she said, “you’re going to try! you’re really going to try!”                
“you’re goddamn right i’m going to try,” i said, knowing that i would,           
whatever it was, “and you can tell that to eric if you want, but remember        
that i might make it. bear in mind that if i do, it might be nice to be my       
friend.”                                                                         
i sure wished i knew what the hell i was talking about, but i’d picked up        
enough terms and felt the importance attached to them, so that i could use       
them properly without knowing what they meant. but they felt right, so           
very right…                                                                      
suddenly, she was kissing me.                                                    
“i won’t tell him. really, i won’t, corwin! i think you can do it. bleys         
will be difficult, but gerard would probably help you, and maybe benedict.       
then caine would swing over, when he saw what was happening—”                    
“i can do my own planning,” i said.                                              
then she drew away. she poured two glasses of wine and handed one to             
me.                                                                              
“to the future,” she said.                                                       
“i’ll always drink to that.”                                                     
and we did.                                                                      
then she refilled mine and studied me.                                           
“it had to be eric, bleys, or you,” she said. “you’re the only ones with         
any guts or brains. but you’d removed yourself from the picture for so long      
that i’d counted you out of the running.”                                        
“it just goes to show you never can tell.”                                       
i sipped my drink and hoped she’d shut up for just a minute. it seemed           
to me she was being a bit too obvious in trying to play on every side            
available. there was something bothering me, and i wanted to think about         
it.                                                                              
how old was i?                                                                   
that question, i knew, was a part of the answer to the terrible sense of         
distance and removal that i felt from all the persons depicted on the playing    
cards. i was older than i appeared to be. (thirtyish, i’d seemed when i          
looked at me in the mirror—but now i knew that it was because the                
shadows would lie for me.) i was far, far older, and it had been a very long     
time since i had seen my brothers and my sisters, all together and friendly,     
existing side by side as they did on the cards, with no tension, no friction     
among them.                                                                      
we heard the sound of the bell, and carmella moving to answer the                
door.                                                                            
“that would be brother random,” i said, knowing i was right. “he’s               
under my protection.”                                                            
her eyes widened, then she smiled, as though she appreciated some                
clever thing i had done.                                                         
i hadn’t, of course. but i was glad to let her think so.                         
it made me feel safer.                                                           
                                                                    
chapter 4                                                                        
i felt safe for perhaps all of three minutes.                                    
i beat carmella to the door and flung it open.                                   
he staggered in and immediately pushed the door shut behind himself              
and shot the bolt. there were lines under those light eyes and he wasn’t         
wearing a bright doublet and long hose. he needed a shave and he had on a        
brown wool suit. he carried a gabardine overcoat over one arm and wore           
dark suede shoes. but he was random, all right—the random i had seen on          
the card—only the laughing mouth looked tired and there was dirt beneath         
his fingernails.                                                                 
“corwin!” he said, and embraced me.                                              
i squeezed his shoulder. “you look as if you could use a drink,” i said.         
“yes. yes. yes…” he agreed, and i steered him toward the library.                
about three minutes later. after he had seated himself, with a drink in          
one hand and a cigarette in the other, he said to me, “they’re after me.         
they’ll be here soon.”                                                           
flora let out a little shriek, which we both ignored.                            
“who?” i asked.                                                                  
“people out of the shadows,” he said. “i don’t know who they are, or             
who sent them. there are four or five though, maybe even six. they were          
on the plane with me. i took a jet. they occurred around denver. i moved         
the plane several times to subtract them, but it didn’t work—and i didn’t        
want to get too far off the track. i shook them in manhattan, but it’s only a    
matter of time. i think they’ll be here soon.”                                   
“and you’ve no idea at all who sent them?”                                       
he stalled for an instant.                                                       
“well, i guess we’d he safe in limiting it to the family. maybe bleys,           
maybe julian, maybe caine. maybe even you, to get me here. hope not,             
though. you didn’t, did you?”                                                    
“ ‘fraid not,’ i said. “how tough do they look?”                                 
he shrugged. “if it were only two or three, i’d have tried to pull an            
ambush. but not with that whole crowd.”                                          
he was a little guy, maybe five-six in height, weighing perhaps one              
thirty-five. but he sounded as if he meant it when he said he’d take on two      
or three bruisers, single-handed. i wondered suddenly about my own               
physical strength, being his brother. i felt comfortably strong. i knew i’d be   
willing to take on any one man in a fair fight without any special fears.        
how strong was i?                                                                
suddenly, i knew i would have a chance to find out.                              
there came a knocking at the front door.                                         
“what shall we do?” asked flora.                                                 
random laughed, undid his necktie, tossed it atop his coat on the desk.          
he stripped off his suit jacket then and looked about the room. his eyes fell    
upon the saber and he was across the room in an instant and had it in his        
hand. i felt the weight of the .32 within my jacket pocket and thumbed off       
the safety catch.                                                                
“do?” random asked. “there exists a probability that they will gain              
entrance,” he said. “therefore, they will enter. when is the last time you       
stood to battle, sister?”                                                        
“it has been too long,” she replied.                                             
“then you had better start remembering fast,” he told her, “because it is        
only a matter of small time. they are guided, i can tell you. but there are      
three of us and at most only twice as many of them. why worry?”                  
“we don’t know what they are.” she said.                                         
the knocking came again.                                                         
“what does it matter?”                                                           
“nothing,” i said. “shall i go and let them in?” they both blanched              
slightly.                                                                        
“we might as well wait”                                                          
“i might call the cops.” i said.                                                 
they both laughed, almost hysterically. “or eric,” i said, suddenly              
looking at her. but she shook her head.                                          
“we just don’t have the time. we have the trump, but by the time he              
could respond—if he chose to—it would be too late.”                              
“and this might even be his doing, eh?” said random.                             
“i doubt it,” she replied, “very much. it’s not his style.”                      
“true,” i replied, just for the hell of it, and to let them know i was with      
things.                                                                          
the sound of knocking came once again, and much more loudly.                     
“what about carmella?” i asked, upon a sudden thought.                           
flora shook her head.                                                            
“i have decided that it is improbable that she will answer the door.”            
“but you don’t know what you’re up against,” random cried, and he                
was suddenly gone from the room.                                                 
i followed him, along the hallway and into the foyer, in time to stop            
carmella from opening the door.                                                  
we sent her back to her own quarters with instructions to lock herself in,       
and random observed, “that shows the strength of the opposition. where           
are we, corwin?”                                                                 
i shrugged.                                                                      
“if i knew, i’d tell you. for the moment at least, we’re in this together.       
step back!”                                                                      
and i opened the door.                                                           
the first man tried to push me aside, and i stiff-armed him back.                
there were six, i could see that.                                                
“what do you want?” i asked them.                                                
but never a word was spoken, and i saw guns.                                     
i kicked out and slammed the door again and shot the bolt.                       
“okay, they’re really there,” i said. “but how do i know you’re not              
pulling something?”                                                              
“you don’t,” he said, “but i really wish i were. they look wild.”                
i had to agree. the guys on the porch were heavily built and had hats            
pulled down to cover their eyes. their faces had all been covered with           
shadows.                                                                         
“i wish i knew where we are,” said random.                                       
i felt a hackle-raising vibration, in the vicinity of my eardrums. i knew,       
in that moment, that flora had blown her whistle.                                
when i heard a window break, somewhere off to my right, i was not                
surprised to hear a growled rumbling and some baying, somewhere off to           
my left.                                                                         
“she’s called her dogs,” i said, “six mean and vicious brutes, which             
could under other circumstances be after us.”                                    
random nodded, and we both headed off in the direction of the                    
shattering.                                                                      
when we reached the living room, two men were already inside and                 
both had guns.                                                                   
i dropped the first and hit the floor, firing at the second. random leaped       
above me, brandishing his blade, and i saw the second man’s head depart          
his shoulders.                                                                   
by then, two more were through the window. i emptied the automatic at            
them, and i heard the snarling of flora’s hounds mixed with gunfire that         
was not my own.                                                                  
i saw three of the men upon the floor and the same number of flora’s             
dogs. it made me feel good to think we had gotten half them, and as the rest     
came through the window i killed another in a manner which surprised me.         
suddenly, and without thinking, i picked up a huge overstuffed chair             
and hurled it perhaps thirty feet across the room. it broke the back of the      
man it struck.                                                                   
i leaped toward the remaining two, but before i crossed the room,                
random had pierced one of them with the saber, leaving him for the dogs to       
finish off, and was turning toward the other.                                    
the other was pulled down before he could act, however. he killed                
another of the dogs before we could stop him, but he never killed anything       
again after that. random strangled him.                                          
it turned out that two of the dogs were dead and one was badly hurt.             
random killed the injured one with a quick thrust, and we turned our             
attention to the men.                                                            
there was something unusual about their appearance. flora entered and            
helped us to decide what.                                                        
for one thing, all six had uniformly bloodshot eyes. very, very                  
bloodshot eyes. with them, though, the condition seemed normal.                  
for another, all had an extra joint to each finger and thumb, and sharp,         
forward-curving spurs on the backs of their hands.                               
all of them had prominent jaws, and when i forced one open, i counted            
forty-four teeth, most of them longer than human teeth, and several looking      
to be much sharper. their flesh was grayish and hard and shiny.                  
there were undoubtedly other differences also, but those were sufficient         
to prove a point of some sort.                                                   
we took their weapons, and i hung onto three small, flat pistols.                
“they crawled out of the shadows, all right,” said random, and i                 
nodded. “and i was lucky, too. it doesn’t seem they suspected i’d turn up        
with the reinforcements i did—a militant brother and around half a ton of        
dogs.”                                                                           
he went and peered out the broken window, and i decided to let him do            
it himself. “nothing,” he said, after a time. “i’m sure we got them all,” and    
he drew the heavy orange drapes closed and pushed a lot of high-backed           
furniture in front of them. while he was doing that, i went through all their    
pockets.                                                                         
i wasn’t really surprised that i turned up nothing in the way of                 
identification.                                                                  
“let’s go back to the library,” he said, “so i can finish my drink.”             
he cleaned off the blade, carefully, before he seated himself, however,          
and he replaced it on the pegs. i fetched flora a drink while he did this.       
“so it would seem i’m temporarily safe,” he said, “now that there are            
three of us sharing the picture.”                                                
“so it would seem,” flora agreed.                                                
“god, i haven’t eaten since yesterday!” he announced. so flora went to           
tell carmella it was safe to come out now, so long as she stayed clear of the    
living room, and to bring a lot of food to the library.                          
as soon as she left the room, random turned to me and asked, “like,              
what’s it between you?”                                                          
“don’t turn your back on her.”                                                   
“she’s still eric’s?”                                                            
“so far as i can tell.”                                                          
“then what are you doing here?”                                                  
“i was trying to sucker eric into coming around after me himself. he             
knows it’s the only way he’ll really get me, and i wanted to see how badly       
he wanted to.”                                                                   
random shook his head.                                                           
“i don’t think he’ll do it. no percentage. so long as you’re here and he’s       
there, why bother sticking his neck out? he’s still got the stronger position.   
if you want him, you’ll have to go after him.”                                   
“i’ve just about come to the same conclusion.”                                   
his eyes gleamed then, and his old smile appeared. he ran one hand               
through his straw-colored hair and wouldn’t let go of my eyes.                   
“are you going to do it?” he asked.                                              
“maybe,” i said.                                                                 
“don’t ‘maybe’ me, baby. it’s written all over you. i’d almost be willing        
to go along, you know. of all my relations, i like sex the best and eric the     
least.”                                                                          
i lit a cigarette, while i considered.                                           
“you’re thinking,” he said while i thought, “ ‘how far can i trust               
random this time? he is sneaky and mean and just like his name, and he           
will doubtless sell me out if someone offers him a better deal.’ true?”          
i nodded.                                                                        
“however, brother corwin, remember that while i’ve never done you                
much good, i’ve never done you any especial harm either. oh, a few pranks,       
i’ll admit. but, all in all, you might say we’ve gotten along best of all in the 
family—that is, we’ve stayed out of each other’s ways. think it over. i          
believe i hear flora or her woman coming now, so let’s change the                
subject… but quick i don’t suppose you have a deck of the family’s               
favorite playing cards around, do you?”                                          
i shook my head.                                                                 
flora entered the room and said, “carmella will bring in some food               
shortly.”                                                                        
we drank to that, and he winked at me behind her back.                           
the following morning, the bodies were gone from the living room, there          
were no stains upon the carpet, the window appeared to have been repaired,       
and random explained that he had”taken care of things.” i did not see fit to     
question him further.                                                            
we borrowed flora’s mercedes and went for a drive. the countryside               
seemed strangely altered. i couldn’t quite put my finger on what it was that     
was missing or new, but somehow things felt different. this, too, gave me a      
headache when i attempted to consider it, so i decided to suspend such           
thinking for the nonce.                                                          
i was at the wheel, random at my side. i observed that i would like to           
be back in amber again—just to see what sort of response it would obtain.        
“i have been wondering,” he replied, “whether you were out for                   
vengeance, pure and simple, or something more,” thereby shifting the ball        
back to me, to answer or not to answer, as i saw fit.                            
i saw fit. i used the stock phrase:                                              
“i’ve been thinking about that, too,” i said, “trying to figure my               
chances. you know, i just might ‘try.’ ”                                         
he turned toward me then (he had been staring out of the side window)            
and said:                                                                        
“i suppose we’ve all had that ambition, or at least that thought—i know          
i have, though i dismissed me early in the game—and the way i feel about         
it, it’s worth the attempt. you’re asking me, i know, whether i’ll help you.     
the answer is ’yes.’ i’ll do it just to screw up the others.” then, “what do     
you think of flora? would she be of any help?”                                   
“i doubt it very much,” i said. “she’d throw in if things were certain.          
but, then, what’s certain at this point?”                                        
“or any.” he added.                                                              
“or any,” i repeated, so he’d think i knew what sort of response i would         
obtain.                                                                          
i was afraid to confide in him as to the condition of my memory. i was           
also afraid to tell him, so i didn’t. there were so very many things i wanted    
to know, but i had no one to turn to. i thought about it a bit as we drove       
along.                                                                           
“well, when do you want to start?” i asked.                                      
“whenever you’re ready.”                                                         
and there it was, right in my lap, and i didn’t know what to do with it.         
“what about now?” i said.                                                        
he was silent. he lit a cigarette, i think to buy time.                          
i did the same.                                                                  
“okay,” he finally said. “when’s the last time you’ve been back?”                
“it’s been so damn long,” i told him, “that i’m not even sure i remember         
the way.”                                                                        
“all right,” he said, “then we’re going to have to go away before we can         
come back. how much gas have you got?”                                           
“three-quarters of a tank.”                                                      
“then turn left at the next corner, and we’ll see what happens.”                 
i did this thing, and as we drove along all the sidewalks began to               
sparkle.                                                                         
“damn!” he said. “it’s been around twenty years since i’ve taken the             
walk. i’m remembering the right things too soon.”                                
we kept driving, and i kept wondering what the hell was happening.               
the sky had grown a bit greenish, then shaded over into pink.                    
i bit my lip against the asking of questions.                                    
we passed beneath a bridge and when we emerged on the other side the             
sky was a normal color again, but there were windmills all over the place,       
big yellow ones.                                                                 
“don’t worry,” he said quickly, “it could be worse.” i noticed that the          
people we passed were dressed rather strangely, and the roadway was of           
brick.                                                                           
“turn right”                                                                     
i did.                                                                           
purple clouds covered over the sun, and it began to rain. lightning              
stalked the heavens and the skies grumbled above us. i had the windshield        
wipers going full speed, but they weren’t doing a whole lot of good. i           
turned on the headlights and slowed even more.                                   
i would have sworn i’d passed a horseman, racing in the other direction,         
dressed all in gray, collar turned high and head lowered against the rain.       
then the clouds broke themselves apart and we were riding along a                
seashore. the waves splashed high and enormous gulls swept low above             
them. the rain had stopped and i killed the lights and the wipers. now the       
road was of macadam, but i didn’t recognize the place at all. in the rear-       
view mirror there was no sign of the town we had just departed. my grip          
tightened upon the wheel as we passed by a sudden gallows where a                
skeleton was suspended by the neck, pushed from side to side by the wind.        
random just kept smoking and staring out of the window as our road               
turned away from the shore and curved round a hill. a grassy treeless plain      
swept away to our right and a row of hills climbed higher on our left. the       
sky by now was a dark but brilliant blue, like a deep, clear pool, sheltered     
and shaded. i did not recall having ever seen a sky like that before.            
random opened his window to throw away the butt, and an icy breeze               
came in and swirled around inside the car until he closed the window again.      
the breeze had a sea scent to it, salty and sharp.                               
“all roads lead to amber,” he said, as though it were an axiom.                  
then i recalled what flora had said the day before. i didn’t want to             
sound like a dunce or a withholder of crucial information, but i had to tell     
him, for my sake as well as his own, when i realized what her statements         
implied.                                                                         
“you know,” i began, “when you called the other day and i answered               
the phone because flora was out, i’ve a strong feeling she was trying to         
make it to amber, and that she found the way blocked.”                           
at this, he laughed.                                                             
“the woman has very little imagination,” he replied. “of course it               
would be blocked at a time like this. ultimately, we’ll be reduced to            
walking, i’m sure, and it will doubtless take all of our strength and            
ingenuity to make it, if we make it at all. did she think she could walk back    
like a princess in state, treading on flowers the whole way? she’s a dumb        
bitch. she doesn’t really deserve to live, but that’s not for me to say, yet.”   
“turn right at the crossroads,” he decided.                                      
what was happening? i knew he was in some way responsible for the                
exotic changes going on about us, but i couldn’t determine how he was            
doing it, where he was getting us to. i knew i had to learn his secret, but i    
couldn’t just ask him or he’d know i didn’t know. then i’d be at his mercy.      
he seemed to do nothing but smoke and stare, but coming up out of a dip in       
the road we entered a blue desert and the sun was now pink above our heads       
within the shimmering sky. in the rear-view mirror, miles and miles of           
desert stretched out behind us, for as far as i could see. neat trick, that.     
then the engine coughed, sputtered, steadied itself, repeated the                
performance. the steering wheel changed shape beneath my hands. it               
became a crescent; and the seat seemed further back, the car seemed closer       
to the road, and the windshield had more of a slant to it.                       
i said nothing, though, not even when the lavender sandstorm struck us.          
but when it cleared away, i gasped. there was a godawful line of cars all        
jammed up, about half a mile before us. they were all standing still and i       
could hear their horns.                                                          
“slow down,” he said. “it’s the first obstacle.”                                 
i did, and another grist of sand swept over us.                                  
before i could switch on the lights, it was gone, and i blinked my eyes          
several times. all the cars were gone and silent their horns. but the roadway    
sparkled now as the sidewalks had for a time, and i heard random damning         
someone or something under his breath.                                           
“i’m sure i shifted just the way he wanted us to, whoever set up that            
block,” he said. “and it pisses me off that i did what he expected—the           
obvious.”                                                                        
“eric?” i asked.                                                                 
“probably. what do you think we should do? stop and try it the hard              
way for a while, or go on and see if there are more blocks?”                     
“let’s go on a bit. after all, that was only the first.”                         
“okay.” he said, but added, “who knows what the second will be?”                 
the second was a thing—i don’t know how else to describe it.                     
it was a thing that looked like a smelter with arms, squatting in the            
middle of the road, reaching down and picking up cars, eating them.              
i hit the brakes.                                                                
“what’s the matter?” random asked. “keep going. how else can we get              
past them?”                                                                      
“it shook me a bit,” i said, and he gave me a strange, sidelong look as          
another dust storm came up. it had been the wrong thing to say, i knew.          
when the dust cleared away, we were racing along an empty road once              
more. and there were towers in the distance.                                     
“i think i’ve screwed him up.” said random. “i combined several into             
one, and i think it may be one he hasn’t anticipated. after all, no one can      
cover all roads to amber.”                                                       
“true,” i said, hoping to redeem myself from whatever faux pas had               
drawn that strange look.                                                         
i considered random. a little, weak looking guy who could have died              
as easily as i on the previous evening. what was his power? and what was         
all this talk of shadows? something told me that whatever shadows were,          
we moved among them even now. how? it was something random was                   
doing, and since he seemed at rest physically, his hands in plain sight, i       
decided it was something he did with his mind. again, how? well, i’d heard       
him speak of “adding” and “subtracting,” as though the universe in which         
he moved were a big equation.                                                    
i decided—with a sudden certainty— that he was somehow adding and                
subtracting items to and from the world that was visible about us to bring us    
into closer and closer alignment with that strange place, amber, for which       
he was solving. it was something i’d once known how to do. and the key to        
it, i knew in a flash, was remembering amber. but i couldn’t.                    
the road curved abruptly, the desert ended, to give way to fields of tall,       
blue, sharp-looking grass. after a while, the terrain became a bit hilly, and    
at the foot of the third hill the pavement ended and we entered upon a           
narrow dirt road. it was hard-packed, and it wound its way among greater         
hills upon which small shrubs and bayonet like thistle bushes now began to       
appear.                                                                          
after about half an hour of this, the hills went away, and we entered a          
forest of squat, big-boled trees with diamond-shaped leaves of autumn            
orange and purple. a light rain began to fall, and there were many shadows.      
pale mists arose from mats of soggy leaves. off to the right somewhere, i        
heard a howl.                                                                    
the steering wheel changed shape three more times, its latest version            
being an octagonal wooden affair. the car was quite tall now, and we had         
somewhere acquired a hood ornament in the shape of a flamingo. i                 
refrained from commenting on these things, but accommodated myself to            
whatever positions the seat assumed and new operating requirements the           
vehicle obtained. random, however, glanced at the steering wheel just as         
another howl occurred, shook his head, and suddenly the trees were much          
higher, though festooned with hanging vines and something like a blue            
veiling of spanish moss, and the car was almost normal again. i glanced at       
the fuel gauge and saw that we had half a tank.                                  
“we’re making headway,” my brother remarked, and i nodded.                       
the road widened abruptly and acquired a concrete surface. there were            
canals on both sides, full of muddy water. leaves, small branches, and           
colored feathers glided along their surfaces.                                    
i suddenly became lightheaded and a bit dizzy, but “breathe slowly and           
deeply,” said random, before i could remark on it. “we’re taking a short         
cut, and the atmosphere and the gravitation will be a bit different for a time.  
i think we’ve been pretty lucky so far, and i want to push it for all it’s worth 
—get as close as we can, as quickly as we can.”                                  
“good idea,” i said.                                                             
“maybe, maybe not,” he replied, “but i think it’s worth the game—                
look out!”                                                                       
we were climbing a hill and a truck topped it and came barreling down            
toward us. it was on the wrong side of the road. i swerved to avoid it, but it   
swerved, too. at the very last instant, i had to go off the road, onto the soft  
shoulder to my left, and head close to the edge of the canal in order to avoid   
a collision.                                                                     
to my right, the truck screeched to a halt. i tried to pull off the shoulder     
and back onto the road, but we were stuck in the soft soil.                      
then i heard a door slam, and saw that the driver had climbed down               
from the right side of the cab, which meant that he probably was driving on      
the proper side of the road after all, and we were in the wrong. i was sure      
that nowhere in the states did traffic flow in a british manner, but i was       
certain by this time that we had long ago left the earth that i knew.            
the truck was a tanker. it said zunoco on the side in big, blood-red             
letters, and beneath this was the motto “wee covir the werld.” the driver        
covered me with abuse, as i stepped out, rounded the car, and began              
apologizing. he was as big as i was, and built like a beer barrel, and he        
carried a jack handle in one hand.                                               
“look, i said i’m sorry,” i told him. “what do you want me to do?                
nobody got hurt and there was no damage.”                                        
“they shouldn’t turn goddamn drivers like you loose on the road!” he             
yelled.”you’re a friggin’ menace!”                                               
random got out of the car then and said, “mister, you’d better move              
along!” and he had a gun in his hand.                                            
“put that away,” i told him, but he flipped the safety catch off and             
pointed.                                                                         
the guy turned around and started to run, a look of fear widening his            
eyes and loosening his jaw.                                                      
random raised the pistol and took careful aim at the man’s back, and i           
managed to knock his arm to the side just as he pulled the trigger.              
it scored the pavement and ricocheted away.                                      
random turned toward me and his face was almost white.                           
“you bloody fool!” he said. “that shot could have hit the tank!”                 
“it could also have hit the guy you were aiming at.”                             
“so who the hell cares? we’ll never pass this way again, in this                 
generation. that bastard dared to insult a prince of amber! it was your          
honor i was thinking about.”                                                     
“i can take care of my own honor,” i told him, and something cold and            
powerful suddenly gripped me and answered, “for he was mine to kill, not         
yours, had i chosen,” and a sense of outrage filled me.                          
he bowed his head then, as the cab door slammed and the truck took off           
down the road.                                                                   
“i’m sorry, brother,” he said. “i did not mean to presume. but it                
offended me to hear one of them speak to you in such a manner. i know i          
should have waited to let you dispose of him as you saw fit, or at least have    
consulted with you.”                                                             
“well, whatever,” i told him, “let’s get back onto the road and get              
moving, if we can.”                                                              
the rear wheels were sunken up to their hubcaps, and as i stared at              
them, trying to decide the best way to go about things, random called out,       
“okay, i’ve got the front bumper. you take the rear and we’ll carry it back      
to the road—and we’d better deposit it in the left lane.”                        
he wasn’t kidding.                                                               
he’d said something about lesser gravitation, but i didn’t feel that light.      
i knew i was strong, but i had my doubts about being able to raise the rear      
end of a mercedes.                                                               
but on the other hand, i had to try, since he seemed to expect it of me,         
and i couldn’t tip him off as to any gaps in my memory. so i stooped,            
squatted, grasped, and started to straighten my legs. with a sucking sound,      
the rear wheels freed themselves from the moist earth. i was holding my          
end of the car about two feet above the ground! it was heavy, damn! it was       
heavy!—but i could do it!                                                        
with each step that i took, i sank about six inches into the ground. but i       
was carrying it. and random was doing the same with his end.                     
we set it down on the roadway, with a slight jouncing of springs. then i         
took off my shoes and emptied them, cleaned them with swatches of grass,         
wrung out my socks, brushed off the cuffs of my trousers, threw my               
footgear into the rear seat and climbed back into the front, bare footed.        
random jumped in, on the passenger’s side, and said, “look, i want to            
apologize again—”                                                                
“forget it,” i said. “it’s over and done with.”                                  
“yes, but i don’t want you to hold it against me.”                               
“i won’t,” i told him. “just curb your impetuosity in the future, when it        
involves life-taking in my presence.”                                            
“i will,” he promised.                                                           
“then let’s get rolling,” and we did.                                            
we moved through a canyon of rocks, then passed through a city which             
seemed to be made entirely of glass, or glass-like substance, of tall            
buildings, thin and fragile-appearing, and of people through whom the pink       
sun shone, revealing their internal organs and the remains of their last         
meals. they stared at us as we drove by. they mobbed the corners of their        
streets, but no one attempted to halt us or pass in front of us.                 
“the charles forts of this place will doubtless quote this happening for         
many years,” said my brother.                                                    
i nodded.                                                                        
then there was no roadway whatsoever, and we were driving across                 
what seemed an eternal sheet of silicon. after a while it narrowed and           
became our road, and after another while there were marshes to our left and      
our right, low, brown, and stinking. and i saw what i’d swear to be a            
diplodocus raise its head and stare down upon us. then, overhead, an             
enormous bat-winged shape passed by. the sky was now a royal blue, and           
the sun was of fallow gold.                                                      
“we’ve now got less than a quarter tank of gas,” i commented.                    
“okay,” said random, “stop the car.”                                             
i did this and waited.                                                           
for a long time—like maybe six minutes—he was silent, then, “drive               
on,” he said.                                                                    
after about three miles we came to a barricade of logs and i began               
driving around it. a gate occurred on one side, and random told me, “stop        
and blow your horn.”                                                             
i did so. and after a time the wooden gate creaked upon its huge iron            
hinges and swung inward.                                                         
“go on in.” he said. “it’s safe.”                                                
i drove in, and off to my left were three bubble-headed esso pumps, the          
small building behind them being one of the kind i had seen countless times      
before, under more ordinary circumstances. i pulled up before one of the         
pumps and waited.                                                                
the guy who emerged from the building was about five feet tall, of               
enormous girth, with a strawberry-like nose, and his shoulders maybe a           
yard across.                                                                     
“what’ll it be?” he asked. “fill ’er up?”                                        
i nodded. “with regular,” i said.                                                
“pull it up a bit,” he directed.                                                 
i did, and asked random, “is my money any good here?”                            
“look at it,” he told me, and i did.                                             
my wallet was stuffed with orange and yellow bills roman numerals in             
their corners, followed by the letters “d.r.”                                    
he grinned at me as i examined the sheaf.                                        
“see, i’ve taken care of everything,” he said.                                   
“great. by the way, i’m getting hungry.”                                         
we looked around us, and we saw a picture of a gent who sells                    
kentucky fried chicken in another place, staring down at us from a big           
sign.                                                                            
strawberry nose sloshed a little on the ground to make it come out               
even, hung up the hose, approached, and said, “eight drachae regums.”            
i found an orange note with a “v d.r.” on it and three more with “i              
d.r.” and passed them to him.                                                    
“thanks,” he said, and stuffed them in his pocket. “check your oil and           
water?”                                                                          
“yeah.”                                                                          
he added a little water, told me the oil level was okay, and smeared the         
windshield a bit with a dirty rag. then he waved and walked back into the        
shack                                                                            
we drove over to kenni roi’s and got us a bucket full of kentucki fried          
lizzard partes and another bucket of weak, salty tasting beer. then we           
washed up in the outbuilding, beeped the horn at the gate, and waited till a     
man with a halberd hanging over his right shoulder came and opened it for        
us. then we hit the road again.                                                  
a tyrannosaurus leaped before us, hesitated for a moment, then went on           
his way, off to the left. three more pterodactyls passed overhead.               
“i am loath to relinquish amber’s sky,” said random, whatever that               
meant, and i grunted back at him.                                                
“i’m afraid to try it all at once, though,” he continued. “we might be           
torn to bits.”                                                                   
“agreed,” i agreed.                                                              
“but on the other hand, i don’t like this place.”                                
i nodded, so we drove on, till the silicon plain ended and bare rock lay         
all about us.                                                                    
“what are you doing now?” i ventured.                                            
“now that i’ve got the sky, i’m going to try for the terrain,” he said.          
and the rock sheet became rocks, as we drove along. there was bare,              
black earth between, after a while, there was more earth and fewer rocks.        
finally, i saw splotches of green. first a bit of grass here and there. but it   
was a very, very bright green, of a kind like yet unlike that common on          
earth as i knew it.                                                              
soon there was much of it.                                                       
after a time there were trees, spotted occasionally along our way.               
then there was a forest. and what a forest!                                      
i had never seen trees such as this, mighty and majestic, of a deep, rich        
green, slightly tinged with gold. they towered, they soared. they were           
enormous pines, oaks, maples, and many others which i could not                  
distinguish. through them crept a breeze of fantastic and lovely fragrance,      
when i cracked the window a bit. i decided to open it all the way and leave      
it like that after i’d had a few whiffs.                                         
“the forest of arden,” said the man who was my brother. and i knew               
he was right, and somehow i both loved and envied him for his wisdom, his        
knowledge.                                                                       
“brother,” said i, “you’re doing all right. better than i’d expected.            
thank you.”                                                                      
this seemed to take him somewhat aback. it was as if he’d never                  
received a good word from a relative before.                                     
“i’m doing my best,” he said, “and i’ll do it all the way, i promise. look       
at it! we’ve got the sky, and we’ve got the forest! it’s almost too good to be   
true! we’ve passed the halfway point, and nothing’s bugged us especially. i      
think we’re very fortunate. will you give me a regency?”                         
“yes.” i said, not knowing what it meant, but willing to grant it. if it lay     
within my powers.                                                                
he nodded then and said, “you’re okay.”                                          
he was a homicidal little fink, who i recalled had always been sort of a         
rebel. our parents had tried to discipline him in the past, i knew, never very   
successfully. and i realized. with that, that we had shared common parents,      
which i suddenly knew was not the case with me and eric, me and flora,           
me and caine and bleys and fiona. and probably others, but these i’d             
recalled, i knew for sure.                                                       
we were driving on a bare, dirt roadway through a cathedral of                   
enormous trees. it seemed to go on forever and ever. i felt safe in the place.   
occasionally, startled a deer, surprised a fox crossing or standing near the     
road. in places, the way was marked with hoofprints. the sunlight was            
sometimes filtered through leaves, angling like tight golden strings on some     
hindu musical instrument. the breeze was moist and spoke of living things.       
it came to me that i knew this place, that i had ridden this road often in the   
past. i had ridden through the forest of arden on horseback, walked              
through it, hunted in it. lay on mv back beneath some of those great             
boughs, my arms beneath my head, staring upward. i had climbed among             
the branches of some of those giants and looked down upon a green world,         
constantly shifting.                                                             
“i love this place.” i said, only half realizing i had said it aloud. and        
random replied. “you always did.” and there might have been a trace of           
amusement in his voice. i couldn’t be sure. then off in the distance i heard     
a note which i knew to be the voice of a hunting born.                           
“drive faster,” said random suddenly. “that sounds to be julian’s horn”          
i obeyed.                                                                        
the horn sounded again, nearer.                                                  
“those damn hounds of his will tear this car to pieces, and his birds will       
feed on our eyes!” he said. “i’d hate to meet him when he’s this well            
prepared. whatever he hunts, i know he’d willingly relinquish it for quarry      
such as two of his brothers.”                                                    
“ ‘live and let live’ is my philosophy these days,” i remarked.                  
random chuckled.                                                                 
“what a quaint notion. i’ll bet it will last all of five minutes.”               
then the horn sounded again, even nearer, and he remarked, “damn!”               
the speedometer said seventy-five, in quaint, runic numerals, and i was          
afraid to go any faster on that road, and the horn sounded again, much           
nearer now, three long notes, and i could hear the baying of hounds, off to      
the left.                                                                        
“we are now very near to the real earth, though still far from amber,”           
said my brother. “it will be futile to run through adjacent shadows, for if it   
is truly us that he follows. he will pursue us. or his shadow will.”             
“what shall we do!”                                                              
“speed. and hope it is not us that be follows.”                                  
and the horn sounded once again, almost next to us this time.                    
“what the hell is be riding, a locomotive?” i asked.                             
“i’d say he is riding the mighty morgenstern, the fastest horse he has           
ever created.”                                                                   
i let that last word roll around in my head for a while, wondering at it         
and wondering at it. yes, it was true, some inner voice told me. he did          
create morgenstern, out of shadows, fusing into the beast the strength and       
speed of a hurricane and a pile driver.                                          
i remembered that i had call to fear that animal, and then i saw him.            
morgenstern was six hands higher than any other horse i’d ever seen.             
and his eyes were the dead color of a weimaraner dog’s and his coat was a        
light gray and his hooves looked like polished steel. he raced along like the    
wind, pacing the car, and julian was crouched in his saddle—the julian of        
the playing card, long black hair and bright blue eyes. and he had on his        
scaled white armor.                                                              
julian smiled at us and waved, and morgenstern tossed his head and his           
magnificent mane rippled in the wind, like a flag. his legs were a blur. i       
recalled that julian had once had a man wear my castoff garments and             
torment the beast. this was why it had tried to trample me on the day of a       
hunt, when i’d dismounted to skin a buck before it.                              
i’d rolled the window shut once more. so i didn’t think it could tell by         
scent that i was inside the car. but julian had spotted me, and i thought i      
knew what that meant. all about him ran the storm hounds, with their             
tough, tough bodies and their teeth like steel. they too had come out of         
shadow, for no normal dog could run like that. but i knew, for a certainty,      
that the word “normal” did not really apply to anything in this place.           
julian signaled us to stop then, and i glanced at random and he nodded.          
“if we don’t, he’ll just run us down,” he said. so i hit the brakes, slowed,     
stopped.                                                                         
morgenstern reared, pawed the air, struck the earth with all four hooves         
and cantered over. the dogs milled about, their tongues hanging out, their       
sides heaving. the horse was covered with a glistening sheen that i knew to      
he perspiration.                                                                 
“what a surprise!” said julian, in his slow, almost impeded way of               
speaking and a great hawk that was black and green circled and settled upon      
his left shoulder.                                                               
“yes. isn’t it,” i replied. “how have you been?”                                 
“oh, capital,” he decided, “as always. what of yourself and brother              
random?”                                                                         
“i’m in good shape,” i said, and random nodded and remarked, “i                  
thought you’d be indulging in other sports at a time like this.”                 
julian tipped his head and regarded him crookedly, through the                   
windshield.                                                                      
“i enjoy slaughtering beasts,” he said, “and i think of my relatives             
constantly.”                                                                     
a slight coldness worked its way down my back.                                   
“i was distracted from my hunt by the sound of your motor vehicle,” he           
said.”at the time, i did not expect it to contain two such as you. i’d assume    
you are not simply riding for pleasure, but have a destination in mind, such     
as amber. true?”                                                                 
“true,” i agreed. “may i inquire why you are here, rather than there?”           
“eric set me to watching this road,” he replied, and my hand came to             
rest upon one of the pistols in my belt as he spoke. i had a feeling a bullet    
couldn’t breach that armor. though. i considered shooting morgenstern.           
“well, brothers,” he said, smiling, “i welcome you back and i wish you           
a good journey. i’ll doubtless see you shortly in amber. good afternoon,”        
and with that he turned and rode toward the woods.                               
“let’s get the hell out of here,” said random. “he’s probably planning           
an ambush or a chase,” and with this he drew a pistol from his belt and held     
it in his lap.                                                                   
i drove on at a decent speed.                                                    
after about five minutes, when i was just beginning to breathe a bit             
easily, i heard the horn. i pushed down on the gas pedal. knowing that he’d      
catch us anyhow, but trying to buy as much time and gain as much distance        
as i could. we skidded around corners and roared up hills and through            
dales. i almost hit a deer at one point, but we made it around the beast         
without cracking up or slowing.                                                  
the horn sounded nearer now, and random was muttering obscenities.               
i had the feeling that we still had quite a distance to go within the forest,    
and this didn’t hearten me a bit.                                                
we hit one long straight stretch, where i was able to floor it for almost a      
minute. julian’s horn notes grew more distant at that time. but we then          
entered a section where the road wound and twisted and i had to slow             
down. he began to gain on us at once again.                                      
after about six minutes, he appeared in the rear-view mirror, thundering         
along the road, his pack all around him, baying and slavering.                   
random rolled down his window, and after a minute he leaned out and              
began to fire.                                                                   
“damn that armor!” he said. “i’m sure i hit him twice and nothing’s              
happened.”                                                                       
“i hate the thought of killing that beast,” i said, “but try for the horse.”     
“i already have, several times,” he said, tossing his empty pistol to the        
floor and drawing the other, “and either i’m a lousier shot than i thought, or   
it’s true what they say: that it will take a silver bullet to kill morgenstern.” 
he picked off six of the dogs with his remaining rounds, but there were          
still about two dozen left.                                                      
i passed him one of my pistols, and he accounted for five more of the            
beasts.                                                                          
“i’ll save the last round,” he said, “for julian’s head, if he gets close        
enough!”                                                                         
they were perhaps fifty feet behind me at that point, and gaining, so i          
slammed on the brakes. some of the dogs couldn’t halt in time, but julian        
was suddenly gone and a dark shadow passed overhead.                             
morgenstern had leaped over the car. he wheeled then, and as horse and           
rider turned to face us i gunned the engine and the car sped forward.            
with a magnificent leap, morgenstern got them out of the way. in the             
rear-view mirror, i saw two dogs drop a fender they’d torn loose and renew       
the pursuit. some were lying in the road, and there were about fifteen or        
sixteen giving chase.                                                            
“good show,” said random, “but you’re lucky they didn’t go for the               
tires. they’ve probably never hunted a car before.”                              
i passed him my remaining pistol, and “get more dogs,” i said.                   
he fired deliberately and with perfect accuracy, accounting for six.             
and julian was beside the car now, a sword in his right hand.                    
i blew the horn, hoping to spook morgenstern, but it didn’t work. i              
swerved toward them, but the horse danced away. random crouched low in           
his seat and aimed past me. his right hand holding the pistol and resting        
upon his left forearm.                                                           
“don’t fire yet,” i said. “i’m going to try to take him.”                        
“you’re crazy,” he told me, as i hit the brakes again.                           
he lowered his weapon, though.                                                   
as soon as we came to a halt, i flung open my door and leaped out—               
barefooted yet! damn it. i ducked beneath his blade, seized his arm, and         
hurled him from the saddle. he struck me one on the head with his mailed         
left fist, and there were roman candles going off all around me and a            
terrible pain.                                                                   
he lay where he had fallen, being groggy, and there were dogs all                
around me, biting me, and random kicking them. i snatched up julian’s            
blade from where it lay and touched his throat with its point.                   
“call them off!” i cried. “or i’ll nail you to the ground!”                      
he screamed orders at the dogs and they drew back. random was                    
holding morgenstern’s bridle and struggling with the horse.                      
“now, dear brother, what do you have to say for yourself?” i asked.              
there was a cold blue fire within his eyes, and his face was without             
expression.                                                                      
“if you’re going to kill me, be about it,” he said.                              
“in my own good time,” i told him, somehow enjoying the sight of dirt            
on his impeccable armor. “in the meantime, what is your life worth to you?”      
“anything i’ve got, of course.”                                                  
i stepped back.                                                                  
“get up and get into the back seat of the car”, i told him.                      
he did this thing, and i took away his dagger before he got in. random           
resumed his own seat, and kept his pistol with the single remaining round        
aimed at julian’s head.                                                          
“why not just kill him?” he asked.                                               
“i think he’ll he useful,” i said. “there is much that i wish to know. and       
there is still a long way to travel.”                                            
i began to drive, i could see the dogs milling around. morgenstern               
began cantering along after the car.                                             
“i’m afraid i won’t be worth much to you as a prisoner,” julian                  
observed.”although you will torture me, i can only tell you what i know,         
and that isn’t much.”                                                            
“start with that then,” i said.                                                  
“eric looks to have the strongest position,” he told us, “having been            
right there in amber when the whole thing broke loose. at least this is the      
way i saw it, so i offered him my support. had it been one of you, i’d           
probably have done the same thing. eric charged me with keeping guard in         
arden, since it’s one of the main routes. gerard controls the southern           
seaways, and caine is off in the northern waters.”                               
“what of benedict?” random asked.                                                
“i don’t know. i haven’t heard anything. he might be with bleys. he              
might be off somewhere else in shadow and not even have heard of this            
thing yet. he might even be dead. it’s been years since we’ve heard from         
him.”                                                                            
“how many men have you got in arden,” asked random.                              
“over a thousand,” he said. “some are probably watching you right                
now.”                                                                            
“and if they want you to go on living, that’s all they’ll do,” said              
random.                                                                          
“you are doubtless correct,” he replied. “i have to admit, corwin did a          
shrewd thing in taking me prisoner rather than killing me. you just might        
make it through the forest this way.”                                            
“you’re just saying that because you want to live,” said random.                 
“of course i want to live. may i?”                                               
“why?”                                                                           
“in payment for the information i’ve given you.”                                 
random laughed.                                                                  
“you’ve given us very little, and i’m sure more can be torn from you.            
we’ll see, as soon as we get a chance to stop. eh, corwin?”                      
“we’ll see,” i said. “where’s fiona?”                                            
“somewhere to the south, i think,” julian replied.                               
“how about deirdre?”                                                             
“i don’t know.”                                                                  
“llewella?”                                                                      
“in rebma.”                                                                      
“okay,” i said, “i think you’ve told me everything you know.”                    
“i have.”                                                                        
we drove on in silence, and finally the forest began to thin. i’d lost sight     
of morgenstern long ago, though i sometimes saw julian’s falcon pacing us.       
the road took a turn upward, and we were heading toward a pass between           
two purple mountains. the gas tank was a little better than a quarter full.      
within an hour, we were passing between high shoulders of stone.                 
“this would be a good place to set up a road block,” said random.                
“that sounds likely,” i said. “what about it, julian?”                           
he sighed.                                                                       
“yes.” he agreed, “you should be coming upon one very soon. you                  
know how to get by it.”                                                          
we did. when we came to the gate, and the guard in green and brown               
leather, sword unsheathed, advanced upon us, i jerked my thumb toward the        
back seat and said, “get the picture?”                                           
he did, and he recognized us, also.                                              
he hastened to raise the gate, and he saluted us as we passed by.                
there were two more gates before we made it through the pass, and                
somewhere along the way it appeared we had lost the hawk. we had gained          
several thousand feet in elevation now, and i braked the car on a road that      
crawled along the face of a cliff. to our right hand, there was nothing other    
than a long way down.                                                            
“get out,” i said. “you’re going to take a walk.”                                
julian paled.                                                                    
“i won’t grovel,” he said. “i won’t beg you for my life.” and he got out.        
“hell,” i said. “i haven’t had a good grovel in weeks! well… go stand            
by the edge there. a little closer please.” and random kept his pistol aimed     
at his head. “a while back.” i told him, “you said that you would probably       
have supported anyone who occupied eric’s position.”                             
“that’s right.”                                                                  
“look down.”                                                                     
he did. it was along way.                                                        
“okay.” i said, “remember that, should things undergo a sudden change.           
and remember who it was who gave you your life where another would               
have taken it.                                                                   
“come on, random. let’s get moving.”                                             
we left him standing there, breathing heavily, his brows woven together.         
we reached the top and were almost out of gas. i put it in neutral, killed       
the engine, and began the long roll down.                                        
“i’ve been thinking,” said random; “you’ve lost none of your old guile.          
i’d probably have killed him, myself, for what he tried. but i think you did     
the right thing. i think he will throw us his support, if we can get an edge on  
eric. in the meantime, of course, he’ll report what happened to eric.”           
“of course,” i said.                                                             
“and you have more reason to want him dead than any of us.”                      
i smiled.                                                                        
“personal feelings don’t make for good politics, legal decisions, or             
business deals.”                                                                 
random lit two cigarettes and handed me one.                                     
staring downward through the smoke, i caught my first glimpse of that            
sea. beneath the deep blue, almost night-time sky, with that golden sun          
hanging up there in it, the sea was so rich—thick as paint, textured like a      
piece of cloth, of royal blue, almost purple—that it troubled me to look         
upon it. i found myself speaking in a language that i hadn’t realized i knew.    
i was reciting “the ballad of the water-crossers,” and random listened           
until i had finished and asked me, “it has often been said that you composed     
that. is it true?”                                                               
“it’s been so long,” i told him, “that i don’t really remember any more.”        
and as the cliff curved further and further to the left, and as we swung         
downward across its face, heading toward a wooded valley, more and more          
of the sea came within our range of vision.                                      
“the lighthouse of cabra,” said random, gesturing toward an                      
enormous gray tower that rose from the waters, miles out to sea. “i had all      
but forgotten it.”                                                               
“and i,” i replied. “it is a very strange feeling, coming back,” and i           
realized then that we were no longer speaking english, but the language          
called thari.                                                                    
after almost half an hour, we reached the bottom. i kept coasting for as         
far as i could, then turned on the engine. at its sound, a flock of dark birds   
heat its way into the air from the shrubbery off to the left. something gray     
and wolfish-looking broke from cover and dashed toward a nearby thicket;         
the deer it had been stalking, invisible till then, bounded away. we were in a   
lush valley, though not so thickly or massively wooded as the                    
forest of arden, which sloped gently but steadily toward the distant sea.        
high, and climbing higher on the left, the mountains reared. the further         
we advanced into the valley, the better came our view of the nature and full     
extent of that massive height of rock down one of whose lesser slopes we         
had coasted. the mountains continued their march to the sea, growing             
larger as they did so, and taking upon their shoulders a shifting mantle         
tinged with green, mauve, purple, gold, and indigo. the face they turned to      
the sea was invisible to us from the valley, but about the back of that final,   
highest peak swirled the faintest veil of ghost clouds, and occasionally the     
golden sun touched it with fire. i judged we were about thirty-five miles        
from the place of light, and the fuel gauge read near empty. i knew that the     
final peak was our destination. and an eagerness began to grow up within         
me. random was staring in the same direction.                                    
“it’s still there,” i remarked.                                                  
“i’d almost forgotten,” he said.                                                 
and as i shifted gears, i noticed that my trousers had taken on a certain        
sheen which they had not possessed before. also, they were tapered               
considerably as they reached toward my ankles, and i noted that my cuffs         
had vanished. then i noticed my shirt.                                           
it was more like a jacket. and it was black and trimmed with silver; and         
my belt had widened considerably.                                                
on closer inspection, i saw that there was a silver line down the outer          
seams of my pants legs.                                                          
“i find myself garbed effectively,” i observed, to see what that wrought.        
random chuckled, and i saw then that he had some where acquired                  
brown trousers streaked with red and a shirt of orange and brown. a brown        
cap with a yellow border rested on the seat beside him.                          
“i was wondering when you’d notice,” he said. “how do you feel?”                 
“quite good,” i told him, “and by the way, we’re almost out of gas.”             
“too late to do much about that,” he said. “we are now in the real               
world, and it would be a horrible effort to play with shadows. also, it          
would not go unnoticed. i’m afraid we’ll have to hoof it when this gives         
out.”                                                                            
it gave out two and a half miles later. i coasted off to the side of the road    
and stopped. the sun by now was westering farewell, and the shadows had          
grown long indeed.                                                               
i reached into the back seat, where my shoe’s had become black boots,            
and something rattled as my hand groped after them. i drew forth a               
moderately heavy silver sword and scabbard. the scabbard fit my belt             
perfectly. there was also a black cloak, with a clasp like a silver rose.        
“had you thought them lost forever?” asked random.                               
“damn near.” said i.                                                             
we climbed out of the car and began walking. the evening was cool                
and briskly fragrant. there were stars in the east already, and the sun was      
diving toward its bed.                                                           
we trudged along the road, and random said:                                      
“i don’t feel right about this.”                                                 
“what do you mean?”                                                              
“things have gone too easily, thus far,” he told me. “i don’t like it. we        
made it all the way through to the forest of arden with barely a hitch. true,    
julian tried to take care of us there—but i don’t know… we’ve made it so         
very far so readily that i’d almost suspect we were permitted to do it.”         
“this thought has also crossed my mind,” i lied. “what do you think it           
portends?”                                                                       
“i fear,” said he, “that we are walking into a trap.”                            
we walked on for several minutes in silence.                                     
then “ambush?” said i. “these woods seem strangely still.”                       
“i don’t know.”                                                                  
we made maybe two miles, and then the sun was gone. the night was                
black and studded with brilliant stars.                                          
“this is no way for two such as we to move,” random said.                        
“true.”                                                                          
“yet i fear to fetch us steeds.”                                                 
“and i, also.”                                                                   
“what is your assessment of the situation?” random asked.                        
“death and dreck,” said i. “i feel they may be upon us soon.”                    
“do you think we should abandon the roadway?”                                    
“i’ve been thinking about it,” i lied again, “and i don’t see that it would      
hurt any for us to walk off to the side a bit.”                                  
so we did.                                                                       
we passed among trees, we moved past the dark shapes of rocks and                
bushes. and the moon slowly rose, big, of silver, and lighting up the night.     
“i am taken by this feeling that we cannot do it,” random told me.               
“and what reliance can we give this feeling?” i asked.                           
“much.”                                                                          
“why?”                                                                           
“too far and too fast,” he responded. “i don’t like it at all. now we’re in      
the real world, it is too late to turn back. we cannot play with shadows, but    
must rely on our blades.” (he wore a short, burnished one himself.) “i feel,     
therefore. that it is perhaps eric’s will that we have advanced to this point.   
there is nothing much to do about it now, but now we’re here, i wish we’d        
had to battle for every inch of the way.                                         
we continued for another mile and paused for cigarettes, which we held           
cupped in our hands.                                                             
“it’s a lovely night,” i said, to random and the cool breeze. “i                 
suppose… what was that?”                                                         
there was a soft rustling of shrubbery a bit of a way behind us.                 
“some animal, maybe.”                                                            
his blade was in his band.                                                       
we waited, several minutes, but nothing more was heard.                          
so he sheathed it and we started walking again.                                  
there were no more sounds from behind us, but after a time i heard               
something from up ahead.                                                         
he nodded when i glanced at him, and we began to move more                       
cautiously.                                                                      
there was a soft glow, as from a campfire, away, far, in the distance.           
we heard no more sounds, but his shrug showed acquiescence to my                 
gesture as i headed toward it, into the woods, to the right.                     
it was the better part of an hour before we struck the camp. there were          
four men seated about the fire and two sleeping off in the shadows. the girl     
who was bound to a stake had her head turned away from us, but i felt my         
heart quicken as i looked upon her form.                                         
“could that be…?” i whispered.                                                   
“yes.” he replied. “i think it may.”                                             
then she turned her head and i knew it was.                                      
“deirdre!”                                                                       
“i wonder what the bitch has been up to?” random said. “from those               
guys’ colors, i’d venture they’re taking her back to amber.”                     
i saw that they wore black, red, and silver, which i remembered from             
the trumps and from somewhere else to be the colors of eric.                     
“since eric wants her, he can’t have her,” i said.                               
“i never much cared for deirdre,” random said, “but i know you do,               
so…” and he unsheathed his blade.                                                
i did the same. “get ready,” i told him, rising into a crouch. and we            
rushed them. maybe two minutes, that’s about what it took.                       
she was watching us by then, the firelight making her face into a                
twisted mask. she cried and laughed and said our names, in a loud and            
frightened voice, and i slashed her bonds and helped her to her feet.            
“greetings, sister. will you join us on the road to amber?”                      
“no,” she said. “thanks for my life, but i want to keep it. why do you           
walk to amber, as if i didn’t know.”                                             
“there is a throne to be won,” said random, which was news to me.                
“and we are interested parties.”                                                 
“if you’re smart, you’ll stay away and live longer,” she said. and god!          
she was lovely, though a bit tired-looking and dirty.                            
i took her into my arms because i wanted to, and squeezed her. random            
found a skin of wine and we all had a drink.                                     
“eric is the only prince in amber,” she said, “and the troops are loyal to       
him.”                                                                            
“i’m not afraid of eric,” i replied, and i knew i wasn’t certain about that      
statement.                                                                       
“he’ll never let you into amber,” she said. “i was a prisoner myself, till       
i made it out one of the secret ways two days ago. i thought i could walk in     
shadows till all things were done, but it is not easy to begin this close to the 
real place. so his troops found me this morning. they were taking me back.       
i think he might have killed me, had i been returned—though i’m not sure.        
at any rate, i’d have remained a puppet in the city. i think eric may be mad,    
but again, i’m not sure.”                                                        
“what of bleys?” random inquired.                                                
“he sends things out of the shadows, and eric is greatly disturbed. but          
he has never attacked with his real force, and so eric is troubled, and the      
disposition of the crown and scepter remains uncertain, though eric holds        
the one in his right hand.”                                                      
“i see. has he ever spoken of us?”                                               
“not of you, random. but of corwin, yes. he still fears the return of            
corwin to amber. there is relative safety for perhaps five more miles—but        
beyond that, every step of the way is studded with peril. every tree and rock    
is a booby trap and an ambush. because of bleys and because of corwin.           
he wanted you to get at least this far, so that you could not work with          
shadows nor easily escape his power. it is absolutely impossible for either      
of you to enter into amber without falling into one of his traps.”               
“yet you escaped…”                                                               
“that was different. i was trying to get out, not in. perhaps he did not         
guard me so carefully as he would one of you, because of my sex and my           
lack of ambition. and nevertheless, as you can see, i did not succeed.”          
“you have now, sister,” i said, “so long as my blade is free to swing on         
your behalf,” and she kissed my brow and squeezed my hand. i was always          
a sucker for that.                                                               
“i’m sure we’re being followed,” said random, and with a gesture the             
three of us faded into the darkness.                                             
we lay still beneath a bush, keeping watch on our trail.                         
after a time, our whispers indicated that there was a decision for me to         
make. the question was really quite simple: what next?                           
the question was too basic, and i couldn’t stall any more. i knew i              
couldn’t trust them, even dear deirdre, but if i had to level with anybody,      
random was at least in this thing with me, up to his neck, and deirdre was       
my favorite.                                                                     
“beloved relatives,” i told them, “i’ve a confession to make,” and               
random’s hand was already on the hilt of his blade. that’s how far we            
could trust one another. i could already hear his mind clicking: corwin          
brought me here to betray me, he was saying to himself.                          
“if you brought me here to betray me,” be said, “you won’t take me               
back alive.”                                                                     
“are you kidding?” i asked. “i want your help, not your head. what i             
have to say is just this: i don’t know what the hell’s going on. i’ve made       
some guesses, but i don’t really know where the devil we are, what amber         
is, or why we’re crouched here in the bushes hiding from his troops,” i told     
him, “or for that matter, who i am, really.”                                     
there was an awfully long silence, and then random whispered, “what              
do you mean?”                                                                    
“yes,” said deirdre.                                                             
“i mean,” i said, “that i managed to fool you, random. didn’t you think          
it strange that all i did on this trip was drive the car?”                       
“you were the boss,” he told me, “and i figured you were planning. you           
did some pretty shrewd things along the way. i know that you’re corwin.”         
“which is a thing i only found out a couple of days ago, myself,” i said.        
“i know that i am the one you call corwin, but i was in an accident a while      
back. i had head injuries—i’ll show you the scars when we’ve got more            
light—and i am suffering from amnesia. i don’t dig all this talk about           
shadows. i don’t even remember much about amber. all i remember is my            
relatives, and the fact that i can’t trust them much. that’s my story. what’s    
to be done about it?”                                                            
“christ!” said random. “yes, i can see it now! i understand all the little       
things that puzzled me along the way. how did you take flora in so               
completely?”                                                                     
“luck,” i said, “and subconscious sneakiness, i guess. no! that’s not it!        
she was stupid. now i really need you, though.”                                  
“do you think we can make it into the shadows,” said deirdre, and she            
was not speaking to me.                                                          
“yes,” said random, “but i’m not for it. i’d like to see corwin in               
amber, and i’d like to see eric’s head on a pole. i’m willing to take a few      
chances to see these things, so i’m not turning back to the shadows. you         
can if you want. you all think i’m a weakling and a bluff. now you’re            
going to find out. i’m going to see this through.”                               
“thanks, brother,” i said.                                                       
“ill met by moonlight.” said deirdre.                                            
“you could still be tied to a stake,” said random, and she did not reply.        
we lay there a while longer and three men entered the campsite and               
looked about. then two of them bent down and sniffed at the ground.              
then they looked in our direction.                                               
“weir,” whispered random, as they moved in our direction.                        
i saw it happen, though only in shadow. they dropped to all fours and            
the moonlight played tricks with their gray garments. then there were the        
six blazing eyes of our stalkers.                                                
i impaled the first wolf on my silver blade and there was a human howl.          
random beheaded one with a single blow, and to my amazement, i saw               
deirdre raise one in the air and break its back across her knee with a brittle,  
snapping sound.                                                                  
“quick, your blade,” said random, and i ran his victim through, and              
hers, and there were more cries.                                                 
“we’d better move fast,” said random. “this way!” and we followed.               
“where are we going?” asked deirdre, after perhaps an hour of furtive            
movement through the undergrowth.                                                
“to the sea,” he replied.                                                        
“why?”                                                                           
“it holds corwin’s memory.”                                                      
“where? how?”                                                                    
“rebma, of course.”                                                              
“they’d kill you there and feed your brains to the fishes.”                      
“i’m not going the full distance. you’ll have to take over at the shore          
and talk with your sister’s sister.”                                             
“you mean for him to take the pattern again?”                                    
“yes.”                                                                           
“it’s risky.”                                                                    
“i know. listen. corwin,” he said, “you’ve been decent enough with me            
recently. if by some chance you’re not really corwin, you’re dead. you’ve        
got to be, though. you can’t be someone else. not from the way you’ve            
operated, without memory even. no, i’ll bet your life on it. take a chance       
and try the thing called the pattern. odds are, it’ll restore your memory. are   
you game?”                                                                       
“probably,” i said, “but what is the pattern?”                                   
“rebma is the ghost city.” be told me. “it is the reflection of amber            
within the sea. in it, everything in amber is duplicated, as in a mirror.        
llewella’s people live there, and dwell as though in amber. they hate me         
for a few past peccadilloes, so i cannot venture there with you, but if you      
would speak them fair and perhaps hint at your mission, i feel they would        
let you walk the pattern of rebma, which, while it is the reverse of that in     
amber, should have the same effect. that is, it gives to a son of our father     
the power to walk among shadows.”                                                
“how will this power help me?”                                                   
“it should make you to know what you are.”                                       
“then i’m game.” i said.                                                         
“good man. in that case, we’ll keep heading south. it will take several          
days to reach the stairway… you will go with him, deirdre?”                      
“i will go with my brother corwin.”                                              
i knew she would say that, and i was glad. i was afraid, but i was glad.         
we walked all that night. we avoided three parties of armed troops, and          
in the morning we slept in a cave.                                               
                                                                    
chapter 5                                                                        
we spent two evenings making our way to the pink and sable sands of the          
great sea. it was on the morning of the third day that we arrived at the         
beach, having successfully avoided a small party the sundown before. we          
were loath to step out into the open until we had located the precise spot,      
faiella-bionin, the stairway to rebma, and could cross quickly to it.            
the rising sun cast billions of bright shards into the foaming swell of          
the waters, and our eyes were dazzled by their dance so that we could not        
see beneath the surface. we had lived on fruit and water for two days and i      
was ravenously hungry, but i forgot this as i regarded the wide, sloping         
tiger beach with its sudden twists and rises of coral, orange, pink, and red,    
and its abrupt caches of shells, driftwood, and small polished stones; and       
the sea beyond: rising and falling, splashing softly, all gold and blue and      
royal purple, and casting forth its life-song breezes like benedictions          
beneath dawn’s violet skies.                                                     
the mountain that faces the dawn, kolvir, which has held amber like a            
mother her child for all of time, stood perhaps twenty miles to our left, the    
north, and the sun covered her with gold and made rainbow the veil above         
the city. random looked upon it and gnashed his teeth, then looked away.         
maybe i did, too.                                                                
deirdre touched my hand, gestured                                                
with her head, and began to walk toward the north, parallel to the shore.        
random and i followed. she had apparently spotted some landmark.                 
we’d advanced perhaps a quarter of a mile, when it seemed that the               
earth shook lightly.                                                             
“hoofbeats!” hissed random.                                                      
“look!” said deirdre, and her head was tilted back and she was pointing          
upward.                                                                          
my eyes followed the gesture.                                                    
overhead a hawk circled.                                                         
“how much farther is it?” i asked.                                               
“that cairn of stones,” she said, and i saw it perhaps a hundred yards           
away, about eight feet in height, builded of head-sized, gray stones, worn by    
the wind, the sand, the water, standing in the shape of a truncated pyramid.     
the hoofbeats came louder, and then there were the notes of a horn, not          
julian’s call, though.                                                           
“run!” said random, and we did.                                                  
after perhaps twenty-five paces, the hawk descended. it swooped at               
random, but he had his blade out and took a cut at it. then it turned its        
attention to deirdre.                                                            
i snatched my own blade from its sheath and tried a cut. feathers flew.          
it rose and dropped again, and this time my blade bit something hard—and         
i think it fell. but i couldn’t tell for sure, because i wasn’t about to stop and
look back. the sound of hoofbeats was quite steady now, and loud, and the        
horn notes were near at hand.                                                    
we reached the cairn and deirdre turned at right angles to it and headed         
straight toward the sea.                                                         
i was not about to argue with someone who seemed to know what she                
was doing. i followed, and from the corner of my eye i saw the horsemen.         
they were still off in the distance, but they were thundering along the          
beach, dogs barking and horns blowing, and random and i ran like hell and        
waded out into the surf after our sister.                                        
we were up to our waists when random said, “it’s death if i stay and             
death if i go on.”                                                               
“one is imminent.” i said, “and the other may be open to negotiation.            
let’s move!”                                                                     
we did. we were on some sort of rocky surface which descended into               
the sea. i didn’t know how we would breathe while we walked it, but              
deirdre didn’t seem worried about it, so i tried not to be.                      
but i was.                                                                       
when the water swirled and swished about our heads, i was very                   
worried. deirdre walked straight ahead, though, descending, and i followed,      
and random followed. each few feet there was a drop. we were descending          
an enormous staircase, and it was named faiella-bionin, i knew.                  
one more step would bring the water above my head, but deirdre had               
already dropped below the water line.                                            
so i drew a deep breath and took the plunge.                                     
there were more steps and i kept following them. i wondered why my               
body was not naturally buoyed above them, for i continued to remain erect        
and each step bore me downward as though on a natural staircase, though          
my movements were somewhat slowed. i began wondering what i’d do                 
when i could hold my breath no longer.                                           
there were bubbles about random’s head, and deirdre’s. i tried to                
observe what they were doing, but i couldn’t figure it. their breasts seemed     
to be rising and falling in a normal manner.                                     
when we were about ten feet beneath the surface, random glanced at               
me from where he moved at my left side, and i heard his voice. it was as         
though i had my ear pressed against the bottom of a bathtub and each of his      
words came as the sound of someone kicking upon the side.                        
they were clear, though:                                                         
“i don’t think they’ll persuade the dogs to follow, even if the horses do,”      
he said.                                                                         
“how are you managing to breathe?” i tried saying, and i heard my own            
words distantly.                                                                 
“relax,” he said quickly. “if you’re holding your breath, let it out and         
don’t worry. you’ll be able to breathe so long as you don’t venture off the      
stairway.”                                                                       
“how can that be?” i asked.                                                      
“if we make it, you’ll know,” he said. and his voice had a ringing               
quality to it, through the cold and passing green.                               
we were about twenty feet beneath the surface by then, and i exhaled a           
small amount of air and tried inhaling for perhaps a second.                     
there was nothing disturbing about the sensation, so i protracted it.            
there were more bubbles, but beyond that i felt nothing uncomfortable in         
the transition.                                                                  
there was no sense of increasing pressure during the next ten feet or so,        
and i could see the staircase on which we moved as though through a              
greenish fog. down, down, down it led. straight. direct. and there was           
some kind of light coming from below us.                                         
“if we can make it through the archway, we’ll be safe,” said my sister.          
“you’ll be safe,” random corrected, and i wondered what he had done              
to be despised in the place called rebma.                                        
“if they ride horses which have never made the journey before, then              
they’ll have to follow on foot,” said random. “in that case, we’ll make it.”     
“so they might not follow—if that is the case,” said deirdre.                    
we hurried.                                                                      
by the time we were perhaps fifty feet below the surface, the waters             
grew quite dark and chill. but the glow before us and below us increased,        
and after another ten steps, i could make out the source:                        
there was a pillar rising to the right. at its top was something globe-          
like and glowing. perhaps fifteen steps lower, another such formation            
occurred to the left. beyond that, it seemed there was another one on the        
right, and so on.                                                                
when we entered the vicinity of the thing, the waters grew warmer and            
the stairway itself became clear: it was white, shot through with pink and       
green, and resembled marble but was not slippery despite the water. it was       
perhaps fifty feet in width, and there was a wide banister of the same           
substance on either side.                                                        
fishes swam past us as we walked it. when i looked back over my                  
shoulder, there seemed to be no sign of pursuit.                                 
it became brighter. we entered the vicinity of the first light, and it           
wasn’t a globe on the top of a pillar. my mind must have added that touch        
to the phenomenon, to try to rationalize it at least a bit. it appeared to be a  
flame, about two feet in height, dancing there, as atop a huge torch. i          
decided to ask about it later, and saved my—if you’ll excuse the expression      
—breath, for the rapid descent we were making.                                   
after we had entered the alley of light and had passed six more of the           
torches, random said, “they’re after us,” and i looked back again and saw        
distant figures descending, four of them on horseback.                           
it is a strange feeling to laugh under water and hear yourself.                  
“let them,” i said, and i touched the hilt of my blade, “for now we have         
made it this far, i feel a power upon me!”                                       
we hurried though, and off to our left and to our right the water grew           
black as ink. only the stairway was illuminated, in our mad flight down it,      
and distantly i saw what appeared to be a mighty arch.                           
deirdre was leaping down the stairs two at a time, and there came a              
vibration now, from the staccato beat of the horses’ hooves behind us.           
the band of armed men—filling the way from banister to banister—was              
far behind and above. but the four horsemen had gained on us. we followed        
deirdre as she rushed downward, and my hand stayed upon my blade.                
three, four, five. we passed that many lights before i looked back again         
and saw that the horsemen were perhaps fifty feet above us. the footmen          
were now almost out of sight. the archway loomed ahead, perhaps two              
hundred feet distant. big, shining like alabaster, and carved with tritons,      
sea nymphs, mermaids, and dolphins, it was. and there seemed to be people        
on the other side of it.                                                         
“they must wonder why we have come there,” said random.                          
“it will be an academic point if we don’t make it,” i replied, hurrying, as      
another glance revealed that the horsemen had gained ten feet on us.             
i drew my blade then, and it flashed in the torchlight. random followed          
suit.                                                                            
after another twenty steps or so, the vibrations were terrible within the        
green and we turned, so as not to be cut down as we ran.                         
they were almost upon us. the gates lay a hundred feet to our back,              
and it might have been a hundred miles, unless we could take the four            
horsemen.                                                                        
i crouched, as the man who was headed toward me swung his blade.                 
there was another rider to his right and slightly to his rear, so naturally i    
moved to his left, near to the rail. this required that he strike cross-body, as 
he held his blade in his right hand.                                             
when he struck, i parried in quarte and riposted.                                
he was leaning far forward in the saddle, and the point of my blade              
entered his neck on the right side.                                              
a great billow of blood, like crimson smoke, arose and swirled within            
the greenish light. crazily, i wished van gogh were there to see it.             
the horse continued past, and i leaped at the second rider from the rear.        
he turned to parry the stroke, succeeded. but the force of his speed             
through the water and the strength of my blow removed him from the               
saddle. as he fell, i kicked, and he drifted. i struck at him, hovering there    
above me, and he parried again, but this carried him beyond the rail. i heard    
him scream as the pressure of the waters came upon him. then he was              
silent.                                                                          
i turned my attention then to random, who had slain both a horse and a           
man and was dueling with a second man on foot. by the time i reached             
them, he had slain the man and was laughing. the blood billowed above            
them, and i suddenly realized that i had known mad, sad, bad vincent van         
gogh, and it was really too bad that he couldn’t have painted this.              
the footmen were perhaps a hundred feet behind us, and we turned and             
headed toward the arches. deirdre had already passed through them.               
we ran and we made it. there were many swords at our sides, and the              
footmen turned back. then we sheathed our blades, and random said, “i’ve         
had it,” and we moved to join with the band of people who had stood to           
defend us.                                                                       
random was immediately ordered to surrender his blade, and he                    
shrugged and handed it over. then two men came and stood on either side          
of him and a third at his back, and we continued on down the stair.              
i lost all sense of time in that watery place, but i feel that we walked for     
somewhere between a quarter of an hour and half an hour before we                
reached our destination.                                                         
the golden gates of rebma stood before us. we passed through them.               
we entered the city.                                                             
everything was to be seen through a green haze. there were buildings,            
all of them fragile and most of them high, grouped in patterns and standing      
in colors that entered my eyes and tore through my mind, seeking after           
remembrance. they failed, the sole result of their digging being the now         
familiar ache that accompanies the half recalled, the unrecalled. i had          
walked these streets before, however, that i knew, or ones very much like        
them.                                                                            
random had not said a single word since he had been taken into                   
custody. deirdre’s only conversation had been to inquire after our sister        
llewella. she had been informed that llewella was in rebma.                      
i examined our escort. they were men with green hair, purple hair, and           
black hair, and all of them had eyes of green, save for one fellow whose         
were of a hazel color. all wore only scaled trunks and cloaks, cross-braces      
on their breasts, and short swords depending from sea-shell belts. all were      
pretty much lacking in body hair.                                                
none of them spoke to me, though some stared and some glared, i was              
allowed to keep my weapon.                                                       
inside the city, we were conducted up a wide avenue, lighted by pillar           
flames set at even closer intervals than on faiella-bionin, and people stared    
out at us from behind octagonal, tinted windows, and bright-bellied fishes       
swam by. there came a cool current, like a breeze, as we turned a corner;        
and after a few steps, a warm one, like a wind.                                  
we were taken to the palace in the center of the city, and i knew it as my       
hand knew the glove in my belt. it was an image of the palace of amber,          
obscured only by the green and confused by the many strangely placed             
mirrors which had been set within its walls, inside and out. a woman sat         
upon the throne in the glassite room i almost recalled, and her hair was         
green, though streaked with silver, and her eyes were round as moons of          
jade and her brows rose like the wings of olive gulls. her mouth was small,      
her chin was small; her cheeks were high and wide and rounded. a circlet         
of white gold crossed her brow and there was a crystal necklace about her        
neck. at its tip there flashed a sapphire between her sweet bare breasts,        
whose nipples were also a pale green. she wore scaled trunks of blue and a       
silver belt, and she held a scepter of pink coral in her right hand and had a    
ring upon every finger, and each ring had a stone of a different blue within     
it. she did not smile as she spoke:                                              
“what seek you here, outcasts of amber?” she asked, and her voice was            
a lisping, soft, flowing thing.                                                  
deirdre spoke in reply, saying: “we flee the wrath of the prince who sits        
in the true city—eric! to be frank, we wish to work his downfall. if he is       
loved here, we are lost, and we have delivered ourselves into the hands of       
our enemies. but i feel he is not loved here. so we come asking aid, gentle      
moire—”                                                                          
“i will not give you troops to assault amber.” she replied. “as you              
know, the chaos would be reflected within my own realm.”                         
“that is not what we would have of you, dear moire,” deirdre                     
continued, “but only a small thing, to be achieved at no pain or cost to         
yourself or your subjects.”                                                      
“name it! for as you know, eric is almost as disliked here as this               
recreant who stands at your left hand,” and with this she gestured at my         
brother, who stared at her in frank and insolent appraisal, a small smile        
playing about the corners of his lips.                                           
if he was going to pay—whatever the price—for whatever he had done,              
i could see that he would pay it like a true prince of amber—as our three        
dead brothers had done ages ago, i suddenly recalled. he would pay it,           
mocking them the while, laughing though his mouth was filled with the            
blood of his body, and as he died he would pronounce an irrevocable curse        
which would come to pass. i, too, had this power, i suddenly knew, and i         
would use it if circumstances required its use.                                  
“the thing i would ask,” she said, “is for my brother corwin, who is             
also brother to the lady llewella, who dwells here with you. i believe that      
he has never given you offense…”                                                 
“that is true. but why does he not speak for himself?”                           
“that is a part of the problem, lady. he cannot, for he does, not know           
what to ask. much of his memory has departed, from an accident which             
occurred when he dwelled among shadows. it is to restore his remembrance         
that we have come here, to bring back his recollection of the old days, that     
he might oppose eric in amber.”                                                  
“continue,” said the woman on the throne, regarding me through the               
shadows of her lashes on her eyes.                                               
“in a place in this building,” she said, “there is a room where few would        
go. in that room,” she continued, “upon the floor, traced in fiery outline,      
there lies a duplicate of the thing we call the pattern. only a son or daughter  
of amber’s late liege may walk this pattern and live; and it gives to such a     
person a power over shadow.” here moire blinked several times, and i             
speculated as to the number of her subjects she had sent upon that path, to      
gain some control of this power for rebma. of course, she had failed. “to        
walk the pattern,” deirdre went on, “should, we feel, restore to corwin his      
memory of himself as a prince of amber. he cannot go to amber to do it,          
and this is the only place i know where it is duplicated, other than tir-na      
nog’th, where of course we may not go at this time.”                             
moire turned her gaze upon my sister, swept it over random, returned it          
to me.                                                                           
“is corwin willing to essay this thing?” she asked.                              
i bowed.                                                                         
“willing, m’lady,” i said, and she smiled then.                                  
“very well, you have my permission. i can guarantee you no guarantees            
of safety beyond my realm, however.”                                             
“as to that, your majesty,” said deirdre, “we expect no boons, but will          
take care of it ourselves upon our departure.”                                   
“save for random,” she said, “who will be quite safe.”                           
“what mean you?” asked deirdre, for random would not. of course,                 
speak for himself under the circumstances.                                       
“surely you recall, she said, “that one time prince random came into             
my realm as a friend, and did thereafter depart in haste with my daughter        
morganthe.”                                                                      
“i have heard this said. lady moire, but i am not aware of the truth or          
the baseness of the tale.”                                                       
“it is true,” said moire, “and a month thereafter was she returned to me.        
her suicide came some months after the birth of her son martin. what have        
you to say to that, prince random?”                                              
“nothing,” said random.                                                          
“when martin came of age,” said moire, “because he was of the blood              
of amber, he determined to walk the pattern. he is the only one of my            
people to have succeeded. thereafter, he walked in shadow and i have not         
seen him since. what have you to say to that, lord random?”                      
“nothing,” random replied.                                                       
“therefore, i will punish thee,” moire continued. “you shall marry the           
woman of my choice and remain with her in my realm for a year’s time, or         
you will forfeit your life. what say you to that, random?”                       
random said nothing, but he nodded abruptly.                                     
she stuck her scepter upon the arm of her turquoise throne.                      
“very well,” she said. “so be it”                                                
and so it was.                                                                   
we repaired to the chambers she had granted us, there to refresh ourselves.      
subsequently she appeared at the door of my own.                                 
“hail, moire,” i said.                                                           
“lord corwin of amber,” she told me, “often have i wished to meet                
thee.”                                                                           
“and i thee,” i lied.                                                            
“your exploits are legend.”                                                      
“thank you, but i barely recall the high points.”                                
“may i enter here?”                                                              
“certainly,” and i stepped aside.                                                
she moved into the well-appointed suite she had granted me, she seated           
herself upon the edge of the orange couch.                                       
“when would you like to essay the pattern?”                                      
“as soon as possible,” i told her.                                               
she considered this, then said, “where have you been, among                      
shadows?”                                                                        
“very far from here,” i said, “in a place that i learned to love.”               
“it is strange that a lord of amber should have this capacity.”                  
“what capacity?”                                                                 
“to love,” she replied.                                                          
“perhaps i chose the wrong word.”                                                
“i doubt it,” she said, “for the ballads of corwin do touch upon the             
strings of the heart.”                                                           
“the lady is kind.”                                                              
“but not wrong,” she replied.                                                    
“i’ll give you a ballad one day.”                                                
“what did you do when you dwelled in shadow?”                                    
“it occurs to me that i was a professional soldier, madam. i fought for          
whoever would pay me. also, i composed the words and music to many               
popular songs.”                                                                  
“both these things occur to me as logical and natural.”                          
“pray tell me, what of my brother random?”                                       
“he will marry with a girl among my subjects who is named vialle. she            
is blind and has no wooers among our kind.”                                      
“are you certain,” said i, “that you do the best thing for her?”                 
“she will obtain good status in this manner,” said moire, “though he             
depart after a year and never return. for whatever else may be said of him,      
be is a prince of amber.”                                                        
“what if she comes to love him?”                                                 
“could anyone really do this thing?”                                             
“in my way, i love him, as a brother.”                                           
“then this is the first time a son of amber has ever said such a thing,          
and i attribute it to your poetic temperament.”                                  
“whatever,” said i, “be very sure that it is the best thing for the girl.”       
“i have considered it,” she told me, “and i am certain. she will recover         
from whatever pain he inflicts, and after his departure she will be a great      
lady of my court.”                                                               
“so may it be,” i said, and looked away, feeling a sadness come over me          
—for the girl, of course.                                                        
“what may i say to you?” i said. “perhaps you do a good thing. i hope            
so.” and i took her hand and kissed it.                                          
“you, lord corwin, are the only prince of amber i might support,” she            
told me. “save possibly for benedict. he is gone these twelve years and ten,     
however, and lir knows where his bones may lie. pity.”                           
“i did not knew this,” i said. “my memory is so screwed up. please bear          
with me. i shall miss benedict, an’ he be dead. he was my master of arms         
and taught me of all weapons. but he was gentle.”                                
“as are you, corwin,” she told me, taking my band and drawing me                 
toward her.                                                                      
“no, not really,” i replied, as i seated myself on the couch at her side.        
then she said, “we’ve much time till we dine.” then she leaned against me        
with the front of her shoulder which was soft.                                   
“when do we eat?” i asked.                                                       
“whenever i declare it,” she said, and she faced me more fully.                  
so i drew her upon me and found the catch to the buckle which covered            
the softness of her belly. there was more softness beneath, and her hair was     
green.                                                                           
upon the couch, i gave her her ballad. her lips replied without words.           
after we had eaten—and i had learned the trick of eating under water,            
which i might detail later on if circumstances really warrant—we rose from       
our places within the marble high hall, decorated with nets and ropes of red     
and brown, and we made our way back along a narrow corridor, and down,           
down, beneath the floor of the sea itself, first by means of a spiral staircase  
that screwed its way through absolute darkness and glowed. after about           
twenty paces, my brother said, “screw it!” and stepped off the staircase and     
began swimming downward alongside it.                                            
“it is faster that way,” said moire.                                             
“and it is a long way down,” said deirdre, knowing the distance of the           
one in amber.                                                                    
so we all stepped off and swam downward through darkness, beside the             
glowing, twisting thing.                                                         
it took perhaps ten minutes to reach the bottom, but when our feet               
touched the floor, we stood, with no tendency to drift. there was light about    
us then, from a few feeble flames set within niches in the wall.                 
“why is this part of the ocean, within the double of amber, so different         
from waters elsewhere?” i asked.                                                 
“because that is the way it is,” said deirdre, which irritated me.               
we were in an enormous cavern, and tunnels shot off from it in all               
directions. we moved toward one.                                                 
after walking along it for an awfully long while, we began to encounter          
side passages, some of which had doors or grilles before them and some of        
which did not.                                                                   
at the seventh of these we stopped. it was a huge gray door of some              
slate-like substance, bound in metal, towering to twice my height. i             
remembered something about the size of tritons as i regarded that doorway.       
then moire smiled, just at me, and produced a large key from a ring upon         
her belt and set it within the lock.                                             
she couldn’t turn it, though. perhaps the thing had been unused for too          
long.                                                                            
random growled and his hand shot forward, knocking hers aside.                   
he seized the key in his right hand and twisted.                                 
there came a click.                                                              
then he pushed the door open with his foot and we stared within.                 
in a room the size of a ballroom the pattern was laid. the floor was             
black and looked smooth as glass. and on the floor was the pattern.              
it shimmered like the cold fire that it was, quivered, made the whole            
room seem somehow unsubstantial. it was an elaborate tracery of bright           
power, composed mainly of curves, though there were a few straight lines         
near its middle. it reminded me of a fantastically intricate, life-scale version 
of one of those maze things you do with a pencil (or ballpoint, as the case      
may be), to get you into or out of something. like, i could almost see the       
words “start here,” somewhere way to the back. it was perhaps a hundred          
yards across at its narrow middle, and maybe a hundred and fifty long.           
it made bells ring within my head,. and then came the throbbing. my              
mind recoiled from the touch of it. but if i were a prince of amber, then        
somewhere within my blood, my nervous system, my genes, this pattern             
was recorded somehow, so that i would respond properly, so that i could          
walk the bloody thing.                                                           
“sure wish i could have a cigarette,” i said, and the girls giggled,             
though rather a little too rapidly and perhaps with a bit of a twist of the      
treble control.                                                                  
random took my arm and said, “it’s an ordeal, but it’s not impossible or         
we wouldn’t be here. take it very slowly and don’t let yourself he               
distracted. don’t be alarmed by the shower of sparks that will arise with        
each step. they can’t hurt you. you’ll feel a mild current passing through       
you the whole time, and after a while you’ll start feeling high. but keep        
concentrating, and don’t forget—keep walking! don’t stop, whatever you           
do, and don’t stray from the path, or it’ll probably kill you,” and as he        
spoke, we walked. we walked close to the right-hand wall and rounded the         
pattern, heading toward its far end. the girls trailed behind us.                
i whispered to him.                                                              
“i tried to talk her out of this thing she’s planned for you. no luck.”          
“i figured you would,” he said. “don’t worry about it. i can do a year           
standing on my head, and they might even let me go sooner, if i’m                
obnoxious enough.”                                                               
“the girl she has lined up for you is named vialle. she’s blind.”                
“great,” he said. “great joke.”                                                  
“remember that regency we spoke of?”                                             
“yeah.”                                                                          
“be kind to her then, stay the full year, and i will be generous.”               
nothing.                                                                         
then he squeezed my arm.                                                         
“friend of yours, huh?” he chuckled. “what’s she like?”                          
“is it a deal?” i said, slowly.                                                  
“it’s a deal.”                                                                   
then we stood at the place where the pattern began, near to the corner           
of the room.                                                                     
i moved forward and regarded the line of inlaid fires that started near to       
the spot where i had placed my right foot. the pattern constituted the only      
illumination within the room. the waters were chill about me.                    
i strode forward, setting my left foot upon the path. it was outlined by         
blue-white sparks. then i set my right foot upon it, and i felt the current      
random had mentioned. i took another step.                                       
there was a crackle and i felt my hair beginning to rise. i took another         
step.                                                                            
then the thing began to curve, abruptly, back upon itself. i took ten            
more paces, and a certain resistance seemed to arise. it was as if a black       
barrier had grown up before me, of some substance which pushed back              
upon me with each effort that i made to pass forward.                            
i fought it. it was the first veil, i suddenly knew.                             
to get beyond it would be an achievement, a good sign, showing that i            
was indeed part of the pattern. each raising and lowering of my foot             
suddenly required a terrible effort, and sparks shot forth from my hair.         
i concentrated on the fiery line. i walked it breathing heavily. suddenly        
the pressure was eased. the veil had parted before me, as abruptly as it had     
occurred. i had passed beyond it and acquired something.                         
i had gained a piece of myself.                                                  
i saw the paper skins and the knobby, stick-like bones of the dead of            
auschwitz. i had been present at nuremberg, i knew. i heard the voice of         
stephen spender reciting “vienna,” and i saw mother courage cross the            
stage on the night of a brecht premiere. i saw the rockets leap up from the      
stained hard places, peenemunde, vandenberg, kennedy, kyzyl kum in               
kazakhstan, and i touched with my hands the wall of china. we were               
drinking beer and wine, and shaxpur said he was drunk and went off to            
puke. i entered the green forests of the western reserve and took three          
scalps one day. i hummed a tune as we marched along and it caught on. it         
become “auprés de ma blonde.” i remembered, i remembered… my life                
within the shadow place its inhabitants had called the earth. three more         
steps, and i held a bloody blade and saw three dead men and my horse, on         
which i had fled the revolution in france. and more, so much more, back to       
—                                                                                
i took another step.                                                             
back to—                                                                         
the dead. they were all about me. there was a horrible stink—the                 
smell of decaying flesh—and i heard the howls of a dog who was being             
beaten to death. billows of black smoke filled the sky, and an icy wind          
swept around me bearing a few small drops of rain. my throat was parched         
and my hands shook and my head was on fire. i staggered alone, seeing            
everything through the haze of the fever that burned me. the gutters were        
filled with garbage and dead cats and the emptyings of chamber pots. with        
a rattle and the ringing of a bell, the death wagon thundered by, splashing      
me with mud and cold water.                                                      
how long i wandered, i do not know, before a woman seized my arm                 
and i saw a death’s head ring upon her finger. she led me to her rooms, but      
discovered there that i had no money and was incoherent. a look of fear          
crossed her pained face, erasing the smile on her bright lips, and she fled      
and i collapsed upon her bed.                                                    
later—again, how much later i do not know—a big man, the girl’s                  
black davy, came and slapped me across the face and dragged me to my             
feet. i seized his right biceps and hung on. he half carried, half pulled me     
toward the door.                                                                 
when i realized that he was going to cast me out into the cold, i                
tightened my grip to protest it. i squeezed with all my remaining strength,      
mumbling half-coherent pleas.                                                    
then through sweat and tear-filled eyes. i saw his face break open and           
heard a scream come forth from between his stained teeth.                        
the bone in his arm had broken where i’d squeezed it.                            
he pushed me away with his left hand and fell to his knees, weeping. i           
sat upon the floor, and my head cleared for a moment.                            
“i… am… staying here,” i said, “until i feel better. get out. if you come        
back—i’ll kill you.”                                                             
“you’ve got the plague!” he cried. “they’ll come for your bones                  
tomorrow!” and he spat then, got to his feet, and staggered out.                 
i made it to the door and barred it. then i crawled back to the bed and          
slept.                                                                           
if they came for my bones the next day, they were disappointed. for,             
perhaps ten hours later, in the middle of the night, i awoke in a cold sweat     
and realized my fever had broken. i was weak, but rational once more.            
i realized i had lived through the plague.                                       
i took a man’s cloak i found in the wardrobe and took some money i               
found in a drawer. then i went forth into london and the night, in a year of     
the plague, looking for something…                                               
i had no recollection of who i was or what i was doing there.                    
that was how it had started.                                                     
i was well into the pattern now, and the sparks flashed continually about        
my feet, reaching to the height of my knees. i no longer knew which              
direction i faced, or where random and deirdre and moire stood. the              
currents swept through me and it seemed my eyeballs were vibrating. then         
came a pins-and-needle feeling in my cheeks and a coldness on the back of        
my neck, i clenched my teeth to keep them from chattering.                       
the auto accident had not given me my amnesia. i had been without full           
memory since the reign of elizabeth i. flora must have concluded that the        
recent accident had restored me. she had known of my condition. i was            
suddenly struck by the thought that she was on that shadow earth mainly to       
keep tabs on me.                                                                 
since the sixteenth century. then?                                               
that i couldn’t say. i’d find out, though.                                       
i took six more rapid steps, reaching the end of an arc and coming to the        
beginning place of a straight line. i set my foot upon it, and with each step    
that i took, another barrier began to rise against me. it was the second veil.   
there was a right-angle turn, then another, then another.                        
i was a prince of amber. it was true. there had been fifteen brothers            
and six were dead. there had been eight sisters, and two were dead,              
possibly four. we had spent much of our time in wandering in shadow, or in       
our own universes. it is an academic, though valid philosophical question,       
as to whether one with power over shadow could create his own universe.          
whatever the ultimate answer, from a practical point we could.                   
another curve began, and it was as though i were walking in glue as i            
moved slowly along it.                                                           
one, two, three, four… i raised my fiery boots and let them down again.          
my head throbbed and my heart felt as though it were fibrillating to             
pieces.                                                                          
amber!                                                                           
the going was suddenly easy once more, as i remembered amber.                    
amber was the greatest city which had ever existed or ever would exist.          
amber had always been and always would be, and every other city,                 
everywhere every other city that existed was but a reflection of a shadow of     
some phase of amber. amber, amber, amber… i remember thee. i shall               
never forget thee again. i guess, deep inside me, i never really did, through    
all those centuries i wandered the shadow earth, for often at night my           
dreams were troubled by images of thy green and golden spires and thy            
sweeping terraces. i remember thy wide promenades and the decks of               
flowers, golden and red. i recall the sweetness of thy airs, and the temples,    
palaces, and pleasances thou containest, contained, will always contain,         
amber, immortal city from which every other city has taken its shape, i          
cannot forget thee, even now, nor forget that day on the pattern of rebma        
when i remembered thee within thy reflected walls, fresh from a meal after       
starvation and the loving of moire, but nothing could compare with the           
pleasure and the love of remembering thee; and even now, as i stand              
contemplating the courts of chaos, telling this story to the only one present    
to hear, that perhaps he may repeat it, that it will not die after i have died   
within; even now, i remember thee with love, city that i was born to rule…       
ten paces, then a swirling filigree of fire confronted me, i essayed it,         
my sweat vanishing into the waters as fast as it sprang forth.                   
it was tricky, so devilish tricky, and it seemed that the waters of the          
room suddenly moved in great currents which threatened to sweep me from          
the pattern. i struggled on, resisting them. instinctively, i knew that to leave 
the pattern before i’d completed it would mean my death. i dared not raise       
my eyes from the places of light that lay before me, to see how far i had        
come, how far i had yet to go.                                                   
the currents subsided and more of my memories returned, memories of              
my life as a prince of amber… no, they are not yours for the asking: they        
are mine, some vicious and cruel, others perhaps noble—memories going            
back to my childhood in the great palace of amber, with the green banner         
of my father oberon flaring above it, white unicorn rampant, facing to the       
dexter.                                                                          
random bad made it through the pattern. even deirdre had made it.                
therefore, i, corwin, would make it, no matter what the resistance.              
i emerged from the filigree and marched along the grand curve. the               
forces that shape the universe fell upon me and beat me into their image.        
i had an advantage over any other person who attempted the walk,                 
however. i knew that i had done it before, so i knew that i could do it. this    
helped me against the unnatural fears which rose like black clouds and were      
gone again, only to return, their strength redoubled. i walked the pattern       
and i remembered all, i remembered all the days before my centuries on the       
shadow earth and i remembered other places of shadow, many of them               
special and dear to me, and one which i loved above all, save for amber.         
i walked three more curves, a straight line, and a series of sharp arcs,         
and i held within me once again a consciousness of the things which i had        
never really lost: mine was the power over shadows.                              
ten arcs which left me dizzy, another short arc, a straight line, and the        
final veil.                                                                      
it was agony to move. everything tried to beat me aside. the waters              
were cold, then boiling. it seemed that they constantly pushed against me. i     
struggled, putting one foot before the other. the sparks reached as high as      
my waist at this point, then my breast, my shoulders. they were into my          
eyes. they were all about me. i could barely see the pattern itself.             
then a short arc, ending in blackness.                                           
one, two… and to take the last step was like trying to push through a            
concrete wall.                                                                   
i did it.                                                                        
then i turned slowly and looked back over the course i had come. i               
would not permit myself the luxury of sagging to my knees. i was a prince        
of amber, and by god! nothing could humble me in the presence of my              
peers. not even the pattern!                                                     
i waved jauntily in what i thought to be the right direction. whether or         
not i could be made out very clearly was another matter.                         
then i stood there a moment and thought.                                         
i knew the power of the pattern now. going back along it would be no             
trick at all.                                                                    
but why bother?                                                                  
i lacked my deck of cards, but the power of the pattern could serve me           
just as well…                                                                    
they were waiting for me, my brother and sister and moire with her               
thighs like marble pillars.                                                      
deirdre could take care of herself from here on out—after all, we’d              
saved her life. i didn’t feel obligated to go on protecting her on a day-by-     
day basis. random was stuck in rebma for a year, unless he had guts              
enough to leap forward and take the pattern to this still center of power and    
perhaps escape. and as for moire, it had been nice knowing her, and maybe        
i’d see her again some day, and like that. i closed my eyes and bowed my         
head.                                                                            
before i did so, though, i saw a fleeting shadow.                                
random? trying it? whatever, he wouldn’t know where i was headed.                
no one would.                                                                    
i opened my eyes and i stood in the middle of the same pattern, in               
reverse.                                                                         
i was cold, and i was damn tired, but i was in amber—in the real room,           
of which the one i had departed was but an image. from the pattern, i could      
transfer myself to any point i wished within amber.                              
getting back would be a problem, however.                                        
so i stood there and dripped and considered.                                     
if eric had taken the royal suite, then i might find him there. or perhaps       
in the throne room. but then, i’d have to make my own way back to the            
place of power, i’d have to walk the pattern again, in order to reach the        
escape point.                                                                    
i transferred myself to a hiding place i knew of within the palace. it was       
a windowless cubicle into which some light trickled from observation slits       
high overhead. i bolted its one sliding panel from the inside, dusted off a      
wooden bench set beside the wall, spread my cloak upon it and stretched          
out for a nap. if anyone came groping his way down from above, i’d hear          
him long before he reached me.                                                   
i slept.                                                                         
after a while, i awakened. so i arose, dusted off my cloak and donned it         
once more. then i began to negotiate the series of pegs which laddered           
their way up into the palace.                                                    
i knew where it was, the third floor, by the markings on the walls.              
i swung myself over to a small landing and searched for the peephole. i          
found it and gazed through. nothing. the library was empty. so i slid back       
the panel and entered.                                                           
within, i was stricken by the multitudes of books. they always do that           
to me. i considered everything, including the display cases, and finally         
moved toward the place where a crystal case contained everything that led        
up to a family banquet—private joke. it held four decks of the family cards,     
and i sought about for a means of obtaining one without setting off an alarm     
which might keep me from using it.                                               
after maybe ten minutes, i succeeded in gimmicking the proper case. it           
was tricky. then, pack in hands, i found a comfortable seat for the              
consideration thereof.                                                           
the cards were just like flora’s and they held us all under glass and            
were cold to the touch. now, too, i knew why.                                    
so i shuffled and spread them all out before me in the proper manner.            
then i read them, and i saw that bad things were in store for the entire         
family; and i gathered them all together then.                                   
save for one.                                                                    
it was the card depicting my brother bleys. i replaced the others in their       
case and tucked it into my belt. then i considered bleys.                        
at about that time there came a scratching in the lock of the great door         
to the library. what could i do? i loosened my blade in its scabbard and         
waited. i ducked low behind the desk, though.                                    
peering out, i saw that it was a guy named dik, who had obviously                
come to clean the place, as he set out emptying the ashtrays and                 
wastebaskets and dusting the shelves.                                            
since it would be demeaning to be discovered, i exposed myself.                  
i rose and said, “hello, dik. remember me?”                                      
he turned three kinds of pale, half bolted, and said:                            
“of course, lord. how could i forget?”                                           
“i suppose it would be possible, after all this time.”                           
“never, lord corwin,” he replied.                                                
“i suppose i’m here without official sanction, and engaged in a bit of           
illicit research,” i said “but if eric doesn’t like it when you tell him that you
saw me, please explain that i was simply exercising my rights, and he will       
be seeing me personally—soon.”                                                   
“i’ll do that, m’lord,” he said, bowing.                                         
“come sit with me a moment, friend dik, and i’ll tell you more.”                 
and he did, so i did.                                                            
“there was a time,” i said, addressing this ancient visage, “when i was          
considered gone for good and abandoned forever. since i still live, however,     
and since i maintain all my faculties, i fear that i must dispute eric’s claim   
to the throne of amber. though it’s not a thing to be settled simply, as he is   
not the first-born, nor do i feel he would enjoy popular support if another      
were in sight. for these, among other reasons—most of them personal—i            
am about to oppose him. i have not yet decided how, nor upon what                
grounds, but by god! he deserves opposition! tell him that. if he wishes to      
seek me, tell him that i dwell among shadows, but different ones than            
before. he may know what i mean by that. i will not be easily destroyed,         
for i will guard myself at least as well as he does here. i will oppose him      
from hell to eternity, and i will not cease until one of us is dead. what say    
you to this, old retainer?”                                                      
and he took my hand and kissed it.                                               
“hail to thee, corwin, lord of amber,” he said, and there was a tear in          
his eye.                                                                         
then the door cracked a crack behind him and swung open.                         
eric entered.                                                                    
“hello,” said i, rising and putting a most obnoxious twang to my voice.          
“i didn’t expect to meet with you this early in the game. how go things in       
amber?”                                                                          
and his eyes were wide with amaze and his voice heavy with that which            
men call sarcasm, and i can’t think of a better word, as he replied:             
“well, when it comes to things, corwin. poorly, on other counts,                 
however.”                                                                        
“pity,” said i, “and how shall we put things aright?”                            
“i know a way,” he said, and then he glared at dik, who promptly                 
departed and closed the door behind him. i heard it snick shut.                  
eric loosened his blade in its scabbard.                                         
“you want the throne,” he said.                                                  
“don’t we all?” i told him.                                                      
“i guess so,” he said, with a sigh. “it’s true, that uneasy-lies-the-head        
bit. i don’t know why we are driven to strive so for this ridiculous position.   
but you must recall that i’ve defeated you twice, mercifully granting you        
your life on a shadow world the last occasion.”                                  
“it wasn’t that merciful,” i said. “you know where you left me, to die of        
the plague. the first time, as i remember, it was pretty much a draw.”           
“then it is between the two of us now, corwin,” he said. “i am your              
elder and your better. if you wish to try me at arms, i find myself suitably     
attired. slay me, and the throne will probably be yours. try it. i don’t think   
you can succeed, however. and i’d like to quit your claim right now. so          
come at me. let’s see what you learned on the shadow earth.”                     
and his blade was in his hand and mine in mine.                                  
i moved around the desk.                                                         
“what an enormous chutzpah you possess,” i told him. “what makes                 
you better than the rest of us, and more fit to rule?”                           
“the fact that i was able to occupy the throne,” he replied. “try and            
take it.”                                                                        
and i did.                                                                       
i tried a headcut, which he parried; and i parried his riposte to my heart       
and cut at his wrist.                                                            
he parried this and kicked a small stool between us. i set it aside,             
hopefully in the direction of his face, with my right toe, but it missed and he  
had at me again.                                                                 
i parried his attack, and he mine. then i lunged, was parried, was               
attacked, and parried again myself.                                              
i tried a very fancy attack i’d learned in france, which involved a beat,        
a feint in quarte, a feint in sixte, and a lunge veering off into an attack on   
his wrist.                                                                       
i nicked him and the blood flowed.                                               
“oh, damnable brother!” he said, retreating. “report has it random               
accompanies thee.”                                                               
“this is true,” said i. “more than one of us are assembled against you.”         
and he lunged then and beat me back, and i felt suddenly that for all my         
work he was still my master. he was perhaps one of the greatest swordsmen        
i had ever faced. i suddenly had the feeling that i couldn’t take him, and i     
parried like mad and retreated in the same fashion as he beat me back, step      
by step. we’d both had centuries under the greatest masters of the blade in      
business. the greatest alive, i knew, was brother benedict, and he wasn’t        
around to help, one way or the other. so i snatched things off the desk with     
my left hand and threw them at eric. but he dodged everything and came           
on strong, and i circled to his left and all like that, but i couldn’t draw the  
point of his blade from my left eye. and i was afraid. the man was               
magnificent. if i didn’t hate him so, i would have applauded his                 
performance.                                                                     
i kept backing away, and the fear and the knowledge came upon me: i              
knew i still couldn’t take him. he was a better man than i was, when it          
came to the blade. i cursed this, but i couldn’t get around it. i tried three    
more elaborate attacks and was defeated on each occasion. he parried me          
and made me retreat before his own attacks.                                      
now don’t get the wrong idea. i’m damn good. it’s just that he seemed            
better.                                                                          
then there were some alarms and excursions in the hall outside. eric’s           
retainers were coming, and if he didn’t kill me before they arrived, then i      
was confident that they’d do the job-probably with a bolt from a crossbow.       
there was blood dripping from his right wrist. his hand was still steady         
but i had the feeling then that under other circumstances, by fighting a         
defensive fight, i just might be able to wear him down with that wrist injury    
going against him, and perhaps i could get through his guard at the proper       
moment when he began to slow.                                                    
i cursed softly and he laughed.                                                  
“you’re a fool to have come here,” he said.                                      
he didn’t realize what i was doing until it was too late. (i’d been              
retreating until the door was at my back. it was risky, leaving myself with      
no room for retreat, but it was better than sure death.)                         
with my left hand, i managed to drop the bar. it was a big, heavy door           
and they’d have to knock it down now to get in. that gave me a few more          
minutes. it also gave me a shoulder wound, from an attack i could only           
partly parry as i dropped the bar. but it was my left shoulder. my sword arm     
remained intact.                                                                 
i smiled, to put up a good front.                                                
“perhaps you were a fool, to enter here,” i said. “you’re slowing. you           
know,” and i tried a hard, fast, vicious attack.                                 
he parried it, but he fell back two paces in doing so.                           
“that wound’s getting to you,” i added. “your arm’s weakening. you               
can feel the strength leaving it—”                                               
“shut up!” he said, and i realized i’d gotten through to him. this               
increased my chances by several percent, i decided, and i pressed him as         
hard as i could, realizing i couldn’t keep that pace up very long.               
but eric didn’t realize it.                                                      
i’d planted the seeds of fear, and he fell back before my sudden                 
onslaught.                                                                       
there was a banging on the door but i didn’t have to worry about that            
for a while anyway.                                                              
“i’m going to take you, eric,” i said. “i’m tougher than i used to be, and       
you’ve had it, brother.”                                                         
i saw the fear begin in his eyes, and it spread over his face, and his style     
shifted to follow suit. he began fighting a completely defensive battle,         
backing away from my attack. i’m sure he wasn’t faking either. i felt i had      
bluffed him, for he had always been better than i. but what if it had been       
partly psychological on my part too? what if i had almost beaten myself          
with this attitude, which eric had helped to foster? what if i had bluffed       
myself all along? maybe i was as good. with a strange sense of confidence,       
i tried the same attack i had used before and i scored, leaving another trail    
of red on his forearm.                                                           
“that was rather stupid. eric.” i said, “to fall for the same trick twice,”      
and he backed around a wide chair. we fought across it for a time.               
the banging on the door stopped, and the voices which had been                   
shouting inquiries through it fell silent.                                       
“they’ve gone for axes,” eric panted. “they’ll be in here in no time.”           
i wouldn’t drop my smile. i held it and said: “it’ll take a few minutes—         
which is more time than i’ll need to finish this. you can hardly keep your       
guard now, and the blood keeps running—look at it!”                              
“shut up!”                                                                       
“by the time they get through, there will he only one prince in amber,           
and it won’t be you!”                                                            
then, with his left arm, he swept a row of books from a shelf and they           
struck me and fell about me.                                                     
he didn’t seize the opportunity to attack,. however. he dashed across            
the room, picking up a small chair, which he held in his left hand.              
he wedged himself into a corner and held the chair and his blade before          
him.                                                                             
there were rapid footsteps in the hall outside, and then axes began to           
ring upon the door.                                                              
“come on!” he said. “try and take me now!”                                       
“you’re scared,” i said.                                                         
he laughed.                                                                      
“academic,” he replied. “you can’t take me before that door falls, and           
then it will be all over for you.”                                               
i had to agree. he could hold off my blade with that setup, at least for         
quite a few minutes.                                                             
i crossed the room quickly, to the opposite wall.                                
with my left hand, i opened the panel through which i had entered.               
“okay,” i said. “it looks like you’re going to live—for a time. you’re           
lucky. next time we meet, there won’t be anyone to help you.”                    
he spat and called me a few traditional vile names, even putting down            
the chair to add an obscene gesture, as i ducked through the panel and           
closed it behind me.                                                             
there came a thunk, and eight inches of steel gleamed on my side of the          
panel as i was fastening it. he had thrown his blade. risky, if i chose to       
return. but he knew i wouldn’t, for the door sounded about ready to fall.        
i descended the pegs as rapidly as i could, to the place where i had slept       
earlier. as i did, i considered my increased skill with the blade. at first, in  
the battle, i had been awed by the man who had beaten me before. now,            
though, i wondered. perhaps those centuries on the shadow earth were not         
a waste. maybe i had actually gotten better during that time. now i felt that    
i might be eric’s equal with the weapon. this made me feel good. if we met       
again, as i was sure we would, and there was no outside interference—who         
knew? i would court the chance, however. today’s encounter had scared            
him. i was certain. that might serve to slow his hand, to cause the              
necessary hesitation on the next occasion.                                       
i let go and dropped the final fifteen feet, bending my knees as i landed.       
i was the proverbial five minutes ahead of the posse, but i was sure i could     
take advantage of it and escape. for i had the cards in my belt.                 
i drew the card that was bleys and stared at it. my shoulder hurt, but i         
forgot it, as the coldness came upon me.                                         
there were two ways to depart directly from amber into shadow…                   
one was the pattern, seldom used for this purpose.                               
another was the trumps, if you could trust a brother.                            
i considered bleys. i could almost trust him. he was my brother, but he          
was in trouble and could use my help.                                            
i stared at him, flame-crowned, dressed all in red and orange, with a            
sword in his right hand and a glass of wine in his left. the devil danced in     
his blue eyes, his beard blazed, and the tracery on his blade, i suddenly        
realized, flared with a portion of the pattern. his rings flashed. he seemed     
to move.                                                                         
the contact came like an icy wind.                                               
the figure on the card seemed life-sized now and changed position into           
whatever stance he presently held. his eyes did not quite focus upon me,         
and his lips moved.                                                              
“who is it?” they said, and i heard the words.                                   
“corwin,” said i, and he held forth his left hand, which no longer bore          
the goblet.                                                                      
“then come to me, if you would.”                                                 
i reached forth and our fingers met. i took a step.                              
i was still holding the card in my left hand, but bleys and i stood              
together on a cliff and there was a chasm to our side and a high fortress to     
our other side. the sky above us was the color of flame.                         
“hello, bleys,” i said, tucking the card into my belt with the others.           
“thanks for the assistance.”                                                     
i suddenly felt weak and realized the blood was still flowing from my            
left shoulder.                                                                   
“you’re wounded!” he said, throwing an arm about my shoulders, and i             
started to nod but fainted instead.                                              
later that night, i sprawled in a big chair within the fortress and drank        
whiskey. we smoked and passed the bottle and talked.                             
“so you were actually in amber?”                                                 
“yes, that’s right.”                                                             
“and you wounded eric in your duel?”                                             
“yes.”                                                                           
“damn! i wish you’d killed him!” then he reflected. “well, maybe not.            
then you’d have held the throne. i might have a better chance against eric       
than i’d have had against you. i don’t know. what are your plans?”               
i decided upon complete honesty.                                                 
“we all want the throne,” i said. “so there’s no reason to lie to one            
another. i’m not about to try killing you for it—that would be foolish—but       
on the other hand. i’m not about to renounce my claim because i’m                
enjoying your hospitality. random would like it, but he’s pretty much out of     
the picture.”                                                                    
“no one has beard from benedict for some time now. gerard and caine              
seem to he supporting eric, rather than promoting their own claims. the          
same goes for julian. that leaves brand and our sisters. i don’t know what       
the hell brand is up to these days, but i do know that deirdre is without        
power, unless she and llewella can raise something in rebma, and flora is        
eric’s creature. i don’t know what fiona is up to.”                              
“and so that leaves us,” said bleys, pouring us each another drink.              
“yes, you’re right. i don’t know what’s going on in everyone’s head right        
now, but i can assess our relative strengths and i think i’m in the best         
position. you made a wise choice in coming to me. support me, and i’ll           
give you a regency.”                                                             
“bless your heart,” i said. we’ll see.”                                          
we sipped our whiskies.                                                          
“what else is there to do?” he asked, and i realized that the question           
was important.                                                                   
“i might raise an army of my own, to lay siege to amber,” i told him.            
“where among shadows lies your army?” he inquired.                               
“that, of course, is my affair.” i said. “i don’t think i’d oppose you.          
when it comes to monarchs. i’d like to see either you. me, gerard, or            
benedict—if he still lives—upon the throne.”                                     
“preferably you, of course.”                                                     
“of course.”                                                                     
“then we understand one another. so i think we can work together, for            
the time being.”                                                                 
“and i,” i agreed, “else i would not have delivered myself into your             
hands.”                                                                          
he smiled within his heard.                                                      
“you needed someone,” he said, “and i was the lesser evil.”                      
“true,” i agreed.                                                                
“i wish benedict were here. i wish gerard bad not sold out.”                     
“wishes, wishes,” i told him, “wish in one hand and do something else            
in the other, and squeeze them both and see which comes true.”                   
“well taken,” he said.                                                           
we smoked a while in silence.                                                    
“how far can i trust you?” he asked.                                             
“as far as i can trust you.”                                                     
“then let’s make a deal. frankly, i had thought you dead for many                
years. i hadn’t foreseen your showing up at a crucial time and pressing your     
own claim. but you’re here, and that’s that. let’s form an alliance, combine     
our forces and lay siege to amber. whichever of us lives through it winds        
up on top. if we both do, well—hell!—we can always fight a duel!”                
i thought about it. it sounded like the best deal i’d get anywhere.              
so i said, “i’d like to sleep on it. tell you in the morning. okay?”             
“okay.”                                                                          
we finished our drinks then and fell to reminiscing. my shoulder                 
throbbed a bit, but the whisky helped, and the salve which bleys had             
supplied. after a time, we were almost maudlin.                                  
it is strange, i guess, to have kin and to be without kinship. for as long       
as our lives had led us along our separate paths. lord! we talked the moon       
out of the heavens before either of us grew tired. then he clapped me upon       
my good shoulder and told me that he was beginning to feel his load and          
that a servant would be by in the morning to bring my breakfast. i nodded,       
we embraced. and he retired.                                                     
then i moved to the window, and from that vantage i could see down               
far into the chasm.                                                              
the campfires below burned like stars. there were thousands of them. i           
could tell that bleys had assembled a mighty force, and i was envious. but,      
on the other hand, it was a good thing. if anyone could take eric, it was        
probably bleys. he wouldn’t he a bad thing in amber; it was just that i          
preferred me.                                                                    
then i watched a while longer, and i saw that strange shapes moved               
among the lights. i wondered then as to the nature of his army.                  
whatever, it was more than i possessed.                                          
i made my way back to the table and poured me a final drink. before i            
quaffed it, however, i lighted a taper. in its light, i withdrew the pack of     
cards i had stolen.                                                              
i spread them before me and i came across the one depicting eric. i laid         
it in the center of the table and put the rest away.                             
after a time, it came to life; and i saw eric in his sleeping garments and       
i heard the words, “who is it?” his arm was bound.                               
“me,” i said, “corwin. how are you?”                                             
he cursed then, and i laughed. this was a dangerous game and maybe               
the whisky had contributed to it. but i continued: “i just felt like telling you 
that all goes well with me. i also wanted to advise you that you were right      
when you spoke of the uneasy head. you won’t be wearing it long, though.         
so cheerio! brother! the day i come again to amber is the day you die!           
just thought i’d tell you, since that day is not too far off.”                   
“come ahead,” he told me, “and i’ll not want for grace in the matter of          
your passing.”                                                                   
his eyes focused on me then and we were close.                                   
i thumbed my nose at him and passed my palm over the card.                       
it was like hanging up a telephone, and i shuffled eric in with all the          
rest.                                                                            
i wondered though, as i approached sleep concerning those troops of              
bleys which occupied the defile below, and i thought upon eric’s defenses.       
it would not be easy.                                                            
                                                                    
chapter 6                                                                        
the land was known as avernus, and the assembled troops were not quite           
men. i reviewed them the following morning, walking behind bleys. they           
were all of them around seven feet in height, had very red skins and little      
hair, catlike eyes, and six-digited hands and feet. they wore garments that      
looked as light as silk, but were woven of something else and were mainly        
gray or blue in color. each bore two short blades, hooked at the end. their      
ears were pointed and their many fingers clawed.                                 
the climate was warm and the colors bewildering, and everyone                    
thought we were gods.                                                            
bleys had found a place where the religion involved brother-gods who             
looked like us and had their troubles. invariably, in the terms of this          
mythos, an evil brother would seize power and seek to oppress the good           
brothers. and of course there was the legend of an apocalypse where they         
themselves would be called upon to stand on the side of the surviving good       
brothers.                                                                        
i wore my left arm in a black sling and considered those who were                
about to die.                                                                    
i stood before a trooper and looked up at him. i asked him, “do you              
know who eric is?”                                                               
“the lord of evil,” he replied.                                                  
i nodded and said, “very good,” and passed on.                                   
bleys had custom-made cannon fodder.                                             
“how large is your army?” i asked him.                                           
“around fifty thousand,” he replied.                                             
“i salute those who are about to give their all,” i told him. “you can’t         
take amber with fifty thousand men, even providing you can get them all to       
the foot of kolvir intact—and you can’t it’s silly even to consider using        
these poor bastards against the immortal city, with their toy swords and all.”   
“i know,” he said, “but they’re not all i’ve got.”                               
“you’ll need a lot more.”                                                        
“then how do three navies sound, half again the size of caine’s and              
gerard’s fleets put together? i’ve a way.”                                       
“not yet enough,” said i, “and barely a beginning.”                              
“i know. i’m still building,” he said.                                           
“well, we’d better build a lot more. eric will sit in amber and kill us as       
we march through shadows. when the remaining forces finally reach the            
foot of kolvir, he’ll decimate them there. then there will be the climb to       
amber. how many hundred do you think will remain when we reach the               
city? enough to be dispatched in five minutes, at almost no cost to eric. if     
this is the best you’ve got, brother bleys, i have misgivings concerning this    
expedition.”                                                                     
“eric has announced his coronation in three months‘ time,” he said. “i           
can triple my forces by then—at least. perhaps i can even have a quarter of      
a million shadow troops to lead against amber. there are other worlds like       
this one, and i will penetrate them. i will raise me such a force of holy        
crusaders as has never been sent against amber before.”                          
“and eric will have had the same time to intensify his defenses. i don’t         
know, bleys… it’s almost a suicide run. i didn’t know the full situation         
when i came here—”                                                               
“and what have you brought with you?” be asked. “nothing! it is                  
rumored that you once commanded troops. where are they?”                         
i turned away from him.                                                          
“they are no more,” i said. “i am certain.”                                      
“could you not find a shadow of your shadow?”                                    
“i don’t want to try,” i said. “i’m sorry.”                                      
“then what real good are you to me?”                                             
“i’ll go,” i told him, “if that’s all you had in mind, if that’s all you really  
wanted me around for—more bodies.”                                               
“wait!” he cried out. “i spoke hastily. i don’t want to lose your counsel,       
if nothing else. stay with me, please. i will even apologize.”                   
“that is not necessary,” i said, knowing what this thing means to a              
prince of amber. “i’ll stay. i think i can help you.”                            
“good!” and he clapped me upon my good shoulder.                                 
“and i’ll get you more troops,” i added. “never fear.”                           
and i did.                                                                       
i walked among shadows, and found a race of furry creatures, dark and            
clawed and fanged, reasonably manlike, and about as intelligent as a             
freshman in the high school of your choice—sorry, kids, but what i mean is       
they were loyal, devoted, honest, and too easily screwed by bastards like me     
and my brother. i felt like the dee-jay of your choice.                          
around a hundred-thousand worshiped us to the extent of taking up                
arms.                                                                            
bleys was impressed and shut up. after a week my shoulder was                    
healed. after two months we had our quarter million and more.                    
“corwin, corwin! you’re still corwin!” he said, and we took another              
drink.                                                                           
but i was feeling kind of funny. most of these troops were destined to           
die. i was the agent responsible for much of this. i felt some remorse,          
though i knew the difference between shadow and substance. each death            
would be a real death; however, i knew that also.                                
and some nights i dwelled upon the playing cards. the missing trumps             
had been restored to the pack i held. one of them was a portrait of amber        
itself, and i knew it could bear me back into the city. the others were those    
of our dead or missing relatives. and one was dad’s, and i skipped it over       
quickly. he was gone.                                                            
i stared at each face for a long while to consider what might be gained          
from each. i cast the cards several times, and the same thing came up on         
each occasion.                                                                   
his name was caine.                                                              
he wore satin that was green and black, and a dark three-cornered hat            
with a green plume of feathers trailing down behind. at his belt there was       
an emerald-studded dagger. he was dark.                                          
“caine,” i said.                                                                 
after a time, there came a reply.                                                
“who?” he asked.                                                                 
“corwin,” said i.                                                                
“corwin! is this a joke?”                                                        
“no.”                                                                            
“what do you want?”                                                              
“what’ve you got?”                                                               
“you know that.” and his eyes shifted and lay upon me, but i watched             
his hand, which was near to his dagger.                                          
“where are you?”                                                                 
“with bleys.”                                                                    
“there was a rumor you’d shown up in amber recently—and i                        
wondered at the bandages on eric’s arm.”                                         
“you’re looking at the reason,” i said. “what’s your price?”                     
“what do you mean?”                                                              
“let us be frank and to the point. do you think bleys and i can take             
eric?”                                                                           
“no, that’s why i’m with eric. and i won’t sell out my armada either, if         
that’s what you’re after—and i’d imagine you are.”                               
i smiled.                                                                        
“perceptive brother,” i replied. “well, it’s been nice talking to you. see       
you in amber—maybe.”                                                             
i moved my hand, and he cried out.                                               
“wait!”                                                                          
“why?”                                                                           
“i don’t even know your offer.”                                                  
“yes. you do,” i said. “you’ve guessed it, and you’re not interested.”           
“i didn’t say that. it’s just that i know where the equities lie.”               
“you mean the power.”                                                            
“okay, the power. what’ve you got to offer?”                                     
we talked for maybe an hour, after which time the northern seaways               
were open to the three phantom fleets of bleys, which might enter                
expecting reinforcements.                                                        
“if you fail, there’ll be three beheadings in amber,” said he.                   
“but you don’t really expect that, do you?” i asked.                             
“no. i think either you or bleys will sit upon the throne before too very        
long. i’ll be satisfied to serve the winner. that regency would be nice. i’d     
still like random’s head as part of the price, though.”                          
“no deal,” i said. “take it as you’ve heard it or forget it.”                    
“i’ll take it.”                                                                  
i smiled and placed my palm upon the card and he was gone.                       
gerard was a matter i’d leave for the morrow. caine had exhausted me.            
i rolled into bed and slept.                                                     
gerard, when be learned the score, agreed to lay off us. mainly because it       
was i who was asking, as he had considered eric a lesser of potent evils.        
i concluded the deal quickly, promising him everything he asked, as no           
heads were involved.                                                             
then i reviewed the troops again and told them more of amber.                    
strangely, they got along like brothers, the big red guys and the little hairy   
ones.                                                                            
it was sad and it was true.                                                      
we were their gods, and that was that.                                           
i saw the fleet, sailing on a great ocean the color of blood. i wondered. in     
the shadow worlds through which they sailed, many of them would be lost.         
i considered the troops of avernus, and my recruits from the place               
called ri‘ik. theirs was the task of marching to earth and amber.                
i shuffled my cards and cast them. i picked up the one called benedict.          
for a long while i searched it, but there was nothing but the cold.              
then i seized upon brand’s. for another long while there was nothing             
but the cold.                                                                    
then there came a scream. it was a horrible, tormented thing.                    
“help me!” came the cry.                                                         
“how can i?” i asked.                                                            
“who is that?” be asked, and i saw his body writhe.                              
“corwin.”                                                                        
“deliver me from this place, brother corwin! anything you name shall             
be yours in return!”                                                             
“where are you?”                                                                 
“i—”                                                                             
and there came a swirling of things my mind refused to conceive of,              
and another scream, torn forth as though in agony and ending in silence.         
then the coldness came in again.                                                 
i found that i was shaking. from what, i did not know.                           
i lit a cigarette and moved to the window to consider the night, leaving         
the cards where they had fallen upon the table-top of my room within the         
garrison.                                                                        
the stars were tiny and misted over. there were no constellations that i         
could recognize. a small blue moon dropped quickly through the darkness.         
the night had come on with a sudden, icy chill and i wrapped my cloak            
close about me. i thought back to the winter of our disastrous campaign in       
russia. gods! i’d almost frozen to death! and where did it all lead?             
to the throne of amber, of course.                                               
for that was sufficient justification for anything.                              
but what of brand? where was he? what was happening about him,                   
and who had done this thing to him?                                              
answers? none.                                                                   
i wondered, though, as i stared up and out, tracing the path of that blue        
disk in its descent. was there something i was missing in the whole picture,     
some factor i didn’t quite dig?                                                  
no answer.                                                                       
i seated myself at the table once more, a small drink at my hand.                
i fingered my way through the pack and found dad’s card.                         
oberon, lord of amber, stood before me in his green and his gold.                
high, wide, and thick, his beard black and shot with silver, his hair the        
same. green rings in gold settings and a blade of golden color. it had once      
seemed to me that nothing could ever displace the immortal liege of amber        
from his throne. what had happened? i still didn’t know. but he was gone.        
how had my father met with his end?                                              
i stared and concentrated.                                                       
nothing, nothing—                                                                
something?                                                                       
something.                                                                       
there came a responding movement, though ever so weak, and the                   
figure on the card turned in upon itself and shriveled to a shadow of the        
man he had been.                                                                 
“father?” i asked.                                                               
nothing.                                                                         
“father?”                                                                        
“yes…” very faint and distant, as though through a seashell, immersed            
in its monotone humming.                                                         
“where are you? what has happened?”                                              
“i…” long pause.                                                                 
“yes? this is corwin, your son. what came to pass in amber, that you             
are gone?”                                                                       
“my time,” he said, sounding even further away.                                  
“do you mean that you abdicated? none of my brothers has given me                
the tale, and i do not trust them sufficiently to ask them. eric now holds the   
city and julian guards the forest of arden. caine and gerard maintain the        
seas. bleys would oppose all and i am allied with him. what are your             
wishes in this matter?”                                                          
“you are the only one—who—has asked,” he gasped. “yes…”                          
“ ‘yes‘ what?”                                                                   
“yes, oppose—them…”                                                              
“what of you? how can i help you?”                                               
“i am beyond help. take the throne…                                              
“i? or bleys and i?”                                                             
“you!” he said.                                                                  
“yes?”                                                                           
“you have my blessing… take the throne—and be quick—about it!”                   
“why, father?”                                                                   
“i lack the breath—take it!”                                                     
then he, too, was gone.                                                          
so dad lived. that was interesting, what to do now?                              
i sipped my drink and thought about it.                                          
he still lived, somewhere, and he was king in amber. why had he left?            
where had he gone? what kind of, which, and how many? like that.                 
who knew? not i. so there was no more to say, for now.                           
however…                                                                         
i couldn’t put the thing down. i want you to know that dad and i never           
got along very well. i didn’t hate him, like random or some of the others.       
but i, sure as hell, had no reason to be especially fond of him. he had been     
big, he had been powerful, and he had been there. that was about it. he was      
also most of the history of amber, as we knew it, and the history of amber       
stretches back for so many millennia that you may as well stop counting.         
so what do you do?                                                               
as for me, i finished my drink and went to bed.                                  
the following morning i attended a meeting of bley’s general staff. he had       
four admirals, each in charge of roughly a quarter of his fleet, and a whole     
mess of army officers. altogether there were about thirty of the high-           
ranking brass at the meeting, big and red or small and hairy, as the case        
might be.                                                                        
the meeting lasted perhaps four hours, and then we all broke for lunch.          
it was decided that we would move three days hence. since it would require       
one of the blood to open the way to amber, i was to lead the fleet aboard        
the flagship, and bleys would take his infantry through lands of shadow.         
i was troubled by this, and i asked him what would have happened had i           
not shown up to give this assistance. i was told two things in reply: one, if    
he had had to go it alone, he would have led the fleet through and left them     
at a great distance from shore, returned in a single vessel to avernus and led   
his foot soldiers forward to rendezvous at a given time; and two, he had         
purposely sought for a shadow in which a brother would appear to give him        
aid.                                                                             
i had some misgivings when i heard about the latter, though i knew i             
was really me. the former smacked of being a bit unworkable, since the           
fleet would be too far out to sea to receive any signals from the shore, and     
the chance of missing the date—allowing for mishaps when it came to a            
body that large—was too great, as i saw it, to encourage a whole big lot of      
faith in his general plan.                                                       
but as a tactician, i had always thought him brilliant; and when he laid         
out the maps of amber and the outlying country which he himself had              
drawn, and when he had explained the tactics to be employed therein, i           
knew that he was a prince of amber, almost matchless in his guile.               
the only thing was, we were up against another prince of amber, one              
who occupied what was definitely a stronger position. i was worried, but         
with the impending coronation, it seemed about the only course available         
to us, and i decided to go along for the whole ride. if we lost, we were         
creamed, but he held the biggest threat available and had a workable time        
schedule, which i didn’t.                                                        
so i walked the land called avernus and considered its foggy valleys             
and chasms, its smoking craters, its bright, bright sun against its crazy sky,   
its icy nights and too hot days, its many rocks and carloads of dark sand, its   
tiny, though vicious and poisonous beasts, and its big purple plants, like       
spineless cacti; and on the afternoon of the second day, as i stood on a cliff   
overlooking the sea, beneath a tower of massed vermilion clouds, i decided       
that i rather liked the place for all that, and if its sons would perish in the  
wars of the gods, i would immortalize them one day in song if i were able.       
this mild balm in mind for what i feared, i joined the fleet and took            
command. if we made it, they would be feted forever in the halls of the          
immortals.                                                                       
i was guide and opener of the way. i rejoiced.                                   
so we set sail the following day. and i directed things from the lead            
ship. i led us into a storm, and we emerged that much nearer our                 
destination. i led us past an enormous whirlpool, and we were so much to         
the good. i led us through a shallow rocky place. and the shade of the           
waters deepened afterward. their colors began to approximate those of            
amber. so i still knew how to do it. i could influence our fate in time and      
place. i could take us home. home for me. that is.                               
i led us past strange islands where green birds cawed and green apes             
hung like fruit in the trees, swung, sometimes gibbered, and threw rocks         
into the sea. aimed, doubtless, at us.                                           
i took us far out to sea, and then nosed the fleet around back in the            
direction of shore.                                                              
bleys by now was marching across the plains of the worlds. somehow, i            
knew he would make it, past whatever defenses eric had set up. i kept in         
touch with him by means of the cards, and i learned of his encounters along      
the way. like, ten thousand men dead in a plains battle with centaurs, five      
thousand lost in an earthquake of frightening proportions. fifteen hundred       
dead of a whirlwind plague that swept the camps. nineteen thousand dead          
or missing in action as they passed through the jungles of a place i didn’t      
recognize, when the napalm fell upon them from the strange buzzing things        
that passed overhead. six thousand deserting in a place that looked like the     
heaven they had been promised, five hundred unaccounted for as they              
crossed a sand flat where a mushroom cloud burned and towered beside             
them. eighty-six hundred gone as they moved through a valley of suddenly         
militant machines that rolled forward on treads and fired fires, eight           
hundred sick and abandoned, two hundred dead from flash floods, fifty-four       
dying of duels among themselves, three hundred dead from eating                  
poisonous native fruits, a thousand slain in a massive stampede of buffalo-      
like creatures, seventy-three gone when their tents caught fire, fifteen         
hundred carried away by the floods, two thousand slain by the winds that         
came down from the blue hills.                                                   
i was pleased that i’d lost only a hundred and eighty-six ships in that          
time.                                                                            
to sleep, perchance to dream…yeah, there’s a thing that rubs. eric was           
killing us by inches and hours. his proposed coronation was only a few           
weeks away, and he obviously knew we were coming against him, because            
we died and we died.                                                             
now, it is written that only a prince of amber may walk among                    
shadows, though of course he may lead or direct as many as he chooses            
along such courses. we led our troops and saw them die, but of shadow i          
have this to say: there is shadow and there is substance, and this is the root   
of all things. of substance, there is only amber, the real city, upon the real   
earth, which contains everything. of shadow, there is an infinitude of           
things. every possibility exists somewhere as a shadow of the real. amber,       
by its very existence, has cast such in all directions. and what may one say     
of it beyond? shadow extends from amber to chaos, and all things are             
possible within it. there are only three ways of traversing it, and each of      
them is difficult.                                                               
if one is a prince or princess of the blood, then one may walk, crossing         
through shadows, forcing one’s environment to change as one passes, until        
it is finally in precisely the shape one desires it, and there stop. the shadow  
world is then one’s own, save for family intrusions, to do with as one           
would. in such a place had i dwelled for centuries.                              
the second means is the cards, cast by dworkin, master of the line,              
who had created them in our image, to facilitate communications between          
members of the royal family. he was the ancient artist to whom space and         
perspective meant nothing. he had made up the family trumps, which               
permitted the willer to touch his brethren wherever they might be. i had a       
feeling that these had not been used in full accord with their author’s          
intention.                                                                       
the third was the pattern, also drawn by dworkin, which could only be            
walked by a member of our family. it initiated the walker into the system of     
the cards, as it were, and at its ending gave its walker the power to stride     
across shadows.                                                                  
the cards and the pattern made for instant transport from substance              
through shadow. the other way, walking, was harder.                              
i knew what random had done in delivering me into the true world. as             
we had driven, he kept adding, from memory, that which he recalled of            
amber, and subtracting that which did not agree. when everything                 
corresponded, he knew we had arrived. it was no real trick, for had he the       
knowledge, any man could reach his own amber. even now, bleys and i              
could find shadow ambers where each of us ruled, and spend all of time           
and eternity ruling there. but this would not be the same, for us. for none      
would be the true amber, the city into which we’re born, the city from           
which all others take their shapes.                                              
so we were taking the hardest route, the walk through shadow, for our            
invasion of amber itself. anyone knowing this and possessing the power           
could interpose obstacles. eric had done so, and now we faced them as we         
died. what would come of this? no one knew.                                      
but if eric were crowned king, it would be reflected and shadowed                
everywhere.                                                                      
all the surviving brothers, we princes of amber, i am sure, felt it much         
better, each in his own simple way, personally to achieve this status and        
thereafter let the shadows fall where they might.                                
we passed ghost fleets, the ships of gerard, as we sailed—the flying             
dutchmen of this world—that world, and we knew we were coming near. i            
used them as reference points.                                                   
on the eighth day of our voyaging we were near to amber. that is when            
the storm broke.                                                                 
the sea turned dark, the clouds collected overhead, and the sails grew           
slack within the still that followed. the sun hid its face—an enormous blue      
one—and i felt that eric had found us at last.                                   
then the winds arose, and—if you’ll excuse the expression—broke—                 
upon the vessel i rode.                                                          
we were tempest-tossed and storm-torn, as the poets say. or said. my             
guts felt loose and watery as the first billows hit us. we were hurled from      
side to side like dice in a giant’s hand. we were swept over the waters of the   
sea and the waters from the sky. the sky turned black, and there was sleet       
mixed in with the glassy bell ropes that pulled the thunder. everyone, i’m       
sure, cried out. i know i did. i pulled my way along the shifting deck to        
seize the abandoned wheel. i strapped myself in place and held it. eric had      
cut loose in amber, that was for damn sure.                                      
one, two, three, four, and there was no letup. five hours, then. how             
many men had we lost? i dunno.                                                   
then i felt and heard a tingling and a tinkling, and i saw bleys as              
through a long gray tunnel.                                                      
“what’s the matter?” he asked. “i’ve been trying to reach you.”                  
“life is full of vicissitudes,” i replied. “we’re riding out one of them.”       
“storm?” he said.                                                                
“you bet your sweet ass. it’s the granddaddy of them all. i think i see a        
monster off to port. if he has any brains, he’ll aim for the bottom… he just     
did.”                                                                            
“we just had one ourselves,” bleys told me.                                      
“monster or storm?”                                                              
“storm,” he replied. “two hundred dead.”                                         
“keep the faith,” i said, “hold the fort, and talk to me later. okay?”           
he nodded, and there were lightnings at his back.                                
“eric’s got our number,” he added, before he cut off.                            
i had to agree.                                                                  
it was three more hours before things let up, and many more later i              
learned that we had lost half of the fleet (and on my vessel—the flagship—       
we had lost forty of the crew of one hundred and twenty). it was a hard rain     
that fell.                                                                       
somehow, to the sea over rebma, we made it.                                      
i drew forth my cards and held random’s before me.                               
when he realized who was talking. the first thing he said was “turn              
back,” and i asked him why.                                                      
“ ‘cause, according to llewella, eric can cream you now. she says wait           
a while, till he relaxes, and hit him then—like a year from now, maybe.”         
i shook my head.                                                                 
“sorry,” said i. “can’t. too many losses involved in getting us this far.        
it’s a now-or-never situation.”                                                  
he shrugged, wearing a “like, i warned you” expression.                          
“why. though?” i asked him.                                                      
“mainly because i just learned he can control the weather around here,”          
he said.                                                                         
“we’ll still have to chance it.”                                                 
he shrugged again.                                                               
“don’t say i didn’t tell you.”                                                   
“he definitely knows we’re coming?”                                              
“what do you think? is he a cretin?”                                             
“no.”                                                                            
“then he knows. if i could guess it in rebma, then he knows in amber             
—and i did guess, from a wavering of shadow.”                                    
“unfortunately,” i said, “i have some misgivings about this expedition,          
but it’s bleys‘ show.”                                                           
“you cop out and let him get axed.”                                              
“sorry, but i can’t take the chance. he might win. i’m bringing in the           
fleet.”                                                                          
“you’ve spoken with caine, with gerard?”                                         
“yes.”                                                                           
“then you must think you have a chance upon the waters. but listen,              
eric has figured a way to control the jewel of judgment, i gather, from          
court gossip about its double. he can use it to control the weather here.        
that’s definite. god knows what else he might be able to do with it.”            
“pity,” i said. “we’ll have to suffer it. can’t let a few storms demoralize      
us.”                                                                             
“corwin, i’ll confess. i spoke with eric himself three days ago.”                
“why?”                                                                           
“he asked me. i spoke with him out of boredom. he went into great                
detail concerning his defenses.”                                                 
“that’s because he learned from julian that we came in together. he’s            
sure it’ll get back to me.”                                                      
“probably,” he said. “but that doesn’t change what he said.”                     
“no,” i agreed.                                                                  
“then let bleys fight his own war,” he told me. “you can hit eric later.”        
“he’s about to be crowned in amber.”                                             
“i know, i know. it’s as easy to attack a king, though, as a prince. isn’t       
it? what difference does it make what he calls himself at the time, so long      
as you take him? it’ll still be eric.”                                           
“true,” i said, “but i’ve committed myself.”                                     
“then uncommit yourself,” he said.                                               
“ ‘fraid i can’t do that.”                                                       
“then you’re crazy, charlie.”                                                    
“probably.”                                                                      
“well, good luck, anyhow.”                                                       
“thanks.”                                                                        
“see you around.”                                                                
and that was that, and it troubled me.                                           
was i heading into a trap?                                                       
eric was no fool. perhaps he had a real death-gig lined up. finally, i           
shrugged and leaned out over the rail, the cards once again behind my belt.      
it is a proud and lonely thing to be a prince of amber, incapable of trust.      
i wasn’t real fond of it just then, but there i was.                             
eric, of course, had controlled the storm we’d just passed through, and          
it seemed in line with his being weather master in amber, as random had          
told me.                                                                         
so i tried something myself.                                                     
i headed us toward an amber lousy with snow. it was the most horrible            
blizzard i could conjure up.                                                     
the big flakes began to fall, out there on the ocean.                            
let him stop them a normal enough shadow offering, if he could.                  
and he did.                                                                      
within a half hour’s time the blizzard had died, amber was virtually             
impervious—and it was really the only city. i didn’t want to go off course,      
so i let things be. eric was master of the weather in amber.                     
what to do?                                                                      
we sailed on, of course. into the jaws of death.                                 
what can one say?                                                                
the second storm was worse than the first, but i held the wheel. it was          
electrified, and focused only on the fleet. it drove us apart. it cost us forty  
vessels more.                                                                    
i was afraid to call bleys to see what had been done to him.                     
“around two hundred thousand troops are left,” he said. “flash flood,”           
and i told him what random had told me.                                          
“i’ll buy it,” he said. “but let’s not dwell on it. weather or no, we’ll beat    
him.”                                                                            
“i hope so.”                                                                     
i lit a cigarette and leaned across the bow.                                     
amber should be coming into sight soon, i knew the ways of shadow                
now, and i knew how to get there by walking.                                     
but everyone had misgivings.                                                     
there would never be a perfect day, though.                                      
so we sailed on, and the darkness came upon us like a sudden wave,               
and the worst storm of them all struck.                                          
we managed to ride out its black lashings, but i was scared. it was all          
true, and we were in northern waters. if caine had kept his word, all well       
and good. if he was getting us out, he was in an excellent position.             
so i assumed he had sold us out. why not? i prepared the fleet-seventy-          
three vessels remaining-for battle, when i saw him approach. the cards had       
lied-or else been very correct-when they’d pointed to him as the key figure.     
the lead vessel headed toward my own, and i moved forward to meet it.            
we hove to, and side by side regarded one another. we could have                 
communicated via the trumps, but caine didn’t choose to; and he was in           
the stronger position. therefore, family etiquette required that he choose his   
own means. he obviously wanted to be on record as he called out, through         
an amplifier:                                                                    
“corwin! kindly surrender command of your fleet! i’ve got you                    
outnumbered. you can’t make it through!”                                         
i regarded him across the waves and raised my own amplifier to my                
lips.                                                                            
“what of our arrangement?” i asked.                                              
“null and void,” he said. “your force is far too weak to hurt amber, so          
save lives and surrender it now.”                                                
i looked over my left shoulder and regarded the sun.                             
“pray hear me, brother caine,” said i, “and grant me this then: give me          
your leave to confer with my captains till the sun stands in high heaven.”       
“very well,” he replied, without hesitation. “they appreciate their              
positions, i’m sure.”                                                            
i turned away then and ordered that the ship he turned about and headed          
back in the direction of the main body of vessels.                               
if i tried to flee, caine would pursue me through the shadows and                
destroy the ships, one by one. gunpowder did not ignite on the real earth,       
but if we moved very far away, it too would he employed to our undoing.          
caine would find some, for it was probable, were i to depart, the fleet could    
not sail the shadow seas without me, and would be left as sitting ducks          
upon the real waters here. so the crews were either dead or prisoners,           
whatever i did.                                                                  
random had been right.                                                           
i drew forth bleys‘ trump and concentrated till it moved.                        
“yes?” he said, and his voice was agitated. i could almost hear the              
sounds of battle about him.                                                      
“we’re in trouble,” i said. “seventy-three ships made it through, and            
caine has called on us to surrender by noon.”                                    
“damn his eyes!” said bleys. “i haven’t made it as far as you. we’re in          
the middle of a fight now. an enormous cavalry force is cutting us to            
pieces. so i can’t counsel you fairly. i’ve got my own problems. do as you       
see fit. they’re coming again!” and the contact was broken.                      
i drew forth gerard’s, and sought contact.                                       
when we spoke it seemed i could see a shore line behind him. i seemed            
to recognize it. if my guess was correct, he was in southern waters. i don’t     
like to remember our conversation. i asked him if he could help me against       
caine, and if he would.                                                          
“i only agreed to let you by,” he said. “that is why i withdrew to the           
south. i couldn’t reach you in time if i wanted to. i did not agree to help you  
kill our brother.”                                                               
and before i could reply, he was gone. he was right, of course. he’d             
agreed to give me an opportunity, not to fight my battle for me.                 
what then did that leave me?                                                     
i lit a cigarette. i paced the deck. it was no longer morning. the mists         
had long vanished and the sun warmed my shoulders. soon it would be              
noon. perhaps two hours.                                                         
i fingered my cards, weighed the deck in my hand. i could try a contest          
of wills through them, with either eric or caine. there was that power           
present, and perhaps even others of which i knew nothing. they had been          
so designed, at the command of oberon, by the hand of the mad artist             
dworkin                                                                          
dworkin, that wild-eyed hunchback who had been a sorcerer, priest, or            
psychiatrist—the stories conflicted on this point—from some distant              
shadow where dad had saved him from a disastrous fate he had brought             
upon himself. the details were unknown, but he had always been a bit off         
his rocker since that time. still, he was a great artist, and it was undeniable  
that he possessed some strange power. he had vanished ages ago, after            
creating the cards and tracing the pattern in amber. we had often                
speculated about him, but no one seemed to know his whereabouts. perhaps         
dad had done him in, to keep his secrets secret.                                 
caine would be ready for such an attack, and i probably couldn’t break           
him, though i might be able to hold him. even then, though, his captains         
had doubtless been given the order to attack.                                    
eric would surely be ready for anything, but if there was nothing else           
left to do, i might as well try it. i had nothing to lose but my soul.           
then there was the card for amber itself. i could take myself there with         
it and try an assassination, but i figured the odds were about a million to      
one against my living to effect it.                                              
i was willing to die fighting, but it was senseless for all these men to go      
down with me. perhaps my blood was tainted, despite my power over the            
pattern. a true prince of amber should have had no such qualms. i decided        
then that my centuries on the shadow earth had changed me, softened me           
perhaps, had done something to me which made me unlike my brothers.              
i decided to surrender the fleet and then transport myself to amber and          
challenge eric to a final duel. he’d be foolish to accept. but what the hell—    
i had nothing else left to do.                                                   
i turned to make my wishes known to my officers, and the power fell              
upon me, and i was stricken speechless.                                          
i felt the contact and i finally managed to mutter “who?” through                
clenched teeth. there was no reply, but a twisting thing bored slowly within     
my mind and i wrestled with it there.                                            
after a time when he saw that i could not be broken without a long               
struggle, i heard eric’s voice upon the wind:                                    
“how goes the world with thee, brother?” he inquired.                            
“poorly,” i said or thought, and he chuckled, though his voice seemed            
strained by the efforts of our striving.                                         
“too bad,” be told me. “had you come back and supported me, i would              
have done well by you. now, of course, it is too late. now, i will only          
rejoice when i have broken both you and bleys.”                                  
i did not reply at once, but fought him with all the power i possessed.          
he withdrew slightly before it, but he succeeded in holding me where i           
stood.                                                                           
if either of us dared divert his attention for an instant, we could come         
into physical contact or one of us get the upper hand on the mental plane. i     
could see him now, clearly, in his chambers in the palace. whichever of us       
made such a move, though, he would fall beneath the other’s control.             
so we glared at each other and struggled internally. well, he had solved         
one of my problems, by attacking me first. he held my trump in his left          
hand and his brows were furrowed. i sought for an edge, but couldn’t find        
one. people were talking to me but i couldn’t hear their words as i stood        
there backed against the rail.                                                   
what time was it?                                                                
all sense of time had departed since the beginning of the struggle.              
could two hours have passed? was that it? i couldn’t be sure.                    
“i feel your troubled thought,” said eric. “yes, i am coordinated with           
caine. he contacted me after your parley. i can hold you thus while your         
fleet is demolished around you and sent down to rebma to rot. the fishes         
will eat your men.”                                                              
“wait,” i said. “they are guiltless. bleys and i have misled them, and           
they think we are in the right. their deaths would serve no purpose. i was       
preparing to surrender the fleet.”                                               
“then you should not have taken so long,” he replied, “for now it is too         
late. i cannot call caine to countermand my orders, without releasing you,       
and the moment i release you i will fall beneath your mental domination or       
suffer physical assault. our minds are too proximate.”                           
“supposing i give you my word that i won’t do this thing?”                       
“any man would be forsworn to gain a kingdom,” said eric.                        
“can’t you read the thought? can’t you feel it within my mind? i’ll              
keep my word!”                                                                   
“i feel there is a strange compassion for these men you have duped, and          
i know not what may have caused such a bond, but no. you know it                 
yourself. even if you are sincere at this moment—as you well may be—the          
temptation will be too great the instant the opportunity occurs. you know it     
yourself. i can’t risk it.”                                                      
and i knew it. amber burned too strongly in the blood of us.                     
“your swordsmanship has increased remarkably,” he commented. “i see              
that your exile has done you some good in that respect. you are closer to        
being my equal now than anyone save benedict, who may well be dead.”             
“don’t flatter yourself,” i said. “i know i can take you now. in fact—”          
“don’t bother. i won’t duel with you at this late date,” and he smiled,          
reading my thought, which burned all too clearly.                                
“i more than half wish you had stood by me,” he said. “i could have              
used you more than any of the others. julian i spit upon. caine is a coward.     
gerard is strong, but stupid.”                                                   
i decided to put in the only good word i might.                                  
“listen,” i said. “i conned random into coming here with me. he                  
wasn’t hot on the idea. i think he would have supported you, had you asked       
him.”                                                                            
“that bastard!” he said. “i wouldn’t trust him to empty chamber pots.            
one day i’d find a piranha in mine. no thanks. i might have pardoned him,        
save for your present recommendation. you’d like me to clasp him to my           
bosom and call him brother now, wouldn’t you? oh no! you leap too                
quickly to his defense. it reveals his true attitude, of which he has doubtless  
made you aware. let us forget random in the courts of clemency.”                 
i smelled smoke then and heard the sounds of metal on metal. that                
would mean that caine had come upon us and was doing his job.                    
“good,” said eric, catching it from my mind.                                     
“stop them! please! my men don’t have a chance against that many!”               
“not even were you to yield—” and he bit it off and cursed. i caught the         
thought, then. he could have asked me to yield in return for their lives, and    
then let caine continue with the slaughter. he would have liked to have          
done that, but he’d let those first words slip out in the heat of his passion.   
i chuckled at his irritation.                                                    
“i’ll have you soon, anyhow,” be said. “as soon as they take the                 
flagship.”                                                                       
“until then,” i said, “try this!” and i hit him with everything i had,           
boring into his mind, hurting him with my hatred. i felt his pain and it drove   
me harder. for all the years of exile i’d spent, i lashed at him, seeking at     
least this payment. for his putting me through the plague, i beat at the         
barriers of his sanity, seeking this vengeance. for the auto accident, for       
which i knew he had been responsible, i struck at him, seeking some              
measure of anguish in return for my hurt.                                        
his control began to slip and my frenzy increased. i bore down upon              
him and his hold upon me began to slacken.                                       
finally, “you devil!” he cried, and moved his band to cover the card that        
he held.                                                                         
the contact was broken, and i stood there shaking.                               
i had done it. i had bested him in a contest of wills. no longer would i         
fear my tyrant brother in any form of single combat. i was stronger than he.     
i sucked in several deep breaths and stood erect, ready for the moment           
the coldness of a new mental attack occurred. i knew that it wouldn’t,           
though, not from eric. i sense that he feared my fury.                           
i looked about me and there was fighting. there was already blood on             
the decks. a ship had come alongside us and we were being boarded.               
another vessel was attempting the same maneuver on the opposite side. a          
bolt whistled by my head.                                                        
i drew my blade and leaped into the fray.                                        
i don’t know how many i slew that day. i lost count somewhere after              
number twelve or thirteen. it was more than twice that, on that engagement       
alone, though. the strength with which a prince of amber is naturally            
endowed, which had allowed me to lift a mercedes, served me that day, so         
that i could raise a man with one hand and hurl him over the rail.               
we slew everyone aboard both boarding ships and opened their hatches             
and sent them down to rebma where random would be amused by the                  
carnage. my crew had been cut in half in the battle, and i had suffered          
innumerable nicks and scratches but nothing serious. we went to the aid of       
a sister vessel and knocked off another of caine’s raiders.                      
the survivors of the rescued vessel came aboard the flagship and i had a         
full crew once more.                                                             
“blood!” i called out. “give me blood and vengeance this day, my                 
warriors, and you will be remembered in amber forever!”                          
and as a man. they raised their weapons and cried out, “blood!” and              
gallons—no, rivers—of it were let that day. we destroyed two more of             
caine’s raiders, replenishing our numbers from those of the survivors of our     
own fleet. as we headed toward a sixth, i climbed the mainmast and tried to      
take a quick count.                                                              
we looked to be outnumbered three to one. there seemed to be between             
forty-five and fifty-five remaining of my fleet.                                 
we took the sixth, and we didn’t have to look for the seventh and the            
eighth. they came to us. we took them too, but i received several wounds         
in the fighting that again left me with half a crew. my left shoulder and my     
right thigh had been cut deeply, and a slash along my right hip was hurting.     
as we sent those ships to the bottom, two more moved toward us.                  
we fled and gained an ally in one of my own ships which had been                 
victorious in its own recent battle. we combined crews once more, this time      
transferring the standard to the other vessel, which had been less damaged       
than my own, which had begun shipping water badly and was beginning to           
list to starboard.                                                               
we were allowed no breathing space, as another vessel neared and the             
men attempted to board.                                                          
my men were tired, and i was getting that way. fortunately the other             
crew wasn’t in such great shape either. before the second of caine’s vessels     
came to its aid, we had overwhelmed it, boarded, and transferred the             
standard again. that ship had been in even better shape.                         
we took the next and i was left with a good ship, forty men, and                 
gasping.                                                                         
there was no one in sight to come to our aid now. all of my surviving            
ships were engaged by at least one of caine’s. a raider was heading toward       
us and we fled.                                                                  
we gained perhaps twenty minutes this way. i tried to sail into shadow,          
but it’s a hard, slow thing that near to amber. it’s much easier to get this     
close than it is to depart, because amber is the center, the nexus. if i’d had   
another ten minutes, i could have made it.                                       
i didn’t, though.                                                                
as the vessel hove nearer, i saw another one off in the distance turning         
in our direction. it bore the black and green standard beneath eric’s colors     
and the white unicorn. it was caine’s ship. he wanted to be there for the        
kill.                                                                            
we took the first one and didn’t even have time to open its hatches              
before caine was upon us. i was left standing on the bloody deck, with a         
dozen men about me, and caine moved to the bow of his ship and called            
upon me to surrender.                                                            
“will you grant my men their lives if i do this thing?” i asked him.             
“yes,” he said. “i’d lose a few crewmen myself if i didn’t, and there’s          
no need for that.”                                                               
“on your word as a prince?” i asked.                                             
he thought about it a moment, then nodded.                                       
“very well.” he said. “have your men lay down their arms and board               
my vessel when i come alongside.”                                                
i sheathed my blade and nodded about me.                                         
“you have fought the good fight. and i love you for it,” i said. “but we         
have lost in this place.” i dried my hands on my cloak as i spoke and wiped      
them carefully, as i’d hate to smudge a work of art. “lay down your arms         
and know that your exploits of this day will never be forgotten. one day i       
will praise you before the court of amber.”                                      
the men, the nine big red ones and the three remaining hairy ones, wept          
as they put down their arms.                                                     
“do not fear that all is lost in the struggle for the city,” i said. “we have    
lost only one engagement and the battle still continues elsewhere. my            
brother bleys hacks his way toward amber at this moment. caine will keep         
his word to spare your lives when he sees that i have gone to join with          
bleys upon the land, for he would not have knowledge that he was forsworn        
come into amber. i am sorry that i cannot take you with me.”                     
and with this, i drew bleys‘ trump from the pack and held it low and             
before me, out of sight of the other vessel.                                     
just as caine came alongside, there was movement beneath that cold,              
cold surface.                                                                    
“who?” bleys asked.                                                              
“corwin,” i said. “how fare you?”                                                
“we won the battle, but lost many troops. we’re resting now before we            
renew the march. how go things with you?”                                        
“i think we’ve destroyed nearly half of caine’s fleet, but he’s won the          
day. he’s about to board me now. give me escape.”                                
he held forth his hand and i touched it and collapsed into his arms.             
“this is getting to be a habit,” i muttered, and then i saw that he was          
wounded too, about the head, and there was a bandage around his left hand.       
“had to grab the wrong end of a saber,” he remarked, as he saw my eyes           
fall upon it. “it smarts.”                                                       
i caught my breath and then we walked to his tent, where he opened a             
bottle of wine and gave me bread, cheese, and some dried meat. he still had      
plenty of cigarettes and i smoked one as a medical officer dressed my            
wounds.                                                                          
he still had around a hundred and eighty thousand men behind him. as             
i stood on a hilltop and the evening began around me, it seemed as if i          
looked out over every camp i had ever stood within, stretching on and on         
over the miles and the centuries without end. i suddenly felt tears come into    
my eyes, for the men who are not like the lords of amber, living but a brief     
span and passing into dust, that so many of them must meet their ends upon       
the battlefields of the world.                                                   
i returned to bleys‘ tent and we finished the bottle of wine.                    
                                                                    
chapter 7                                                                        
that night there was a bad storm. it hadn’t let up when dawn struggled to        
cross the world’s palm with silver, and it continued on through the day’s        
march.                                                                           
it is a very demoralizing thing to tramp along and be rained on, a cold          
rain at that. how i’ve always hated the mud, through which it seems i’ve         
spent centuries marching!                                                        
we sought after a shadow way that was free of rain, but nothing we did           
seemed to matter.                                                                
we could march to amber, but we would do it with our clothing                    
sticking to us, to the drumbeat of the thunder, with the flashing of the         
lightning at our backs.                                                          
the next night the temperature plummeted, and in the morning i stared            
past the stiff flags and regarded a world gone white beneath a gray sky,         
filled with flurries. my breath went back in plumes behind me.                   
the troops were ill-equipped for this, save for the hairy ones, and we           
got them all moving quickly, to prevent frostbite. the big red guys suffered.    
theirs had been a very warm world.                                               
we were attacked by tiger, polar bear, and wolf that day. the tiger bleys        
killed measured fourteen feet from tail tip to nose.                             
we marched on well into the night, and the thaw began. bleys pushed              
the troops to get them out of the cold shadows. the trump for amber              
indicated that a warm, dry autumn prevailed there, and we were nearing the       
real earth.                                                                      
by midnight on that second night we’d marched through slush and sleet,           
cold rains, warm rains, and on into a dry world.                                 
the orders were given to make camp then, with triple security cordons.           
considering the tired condition of the men we were ripe for an attack. but       
the troops were staggering and couldn’t be pushed much further.                  
the attack came several hours later, and julian led it, i learned later          
from the description given by survivors.                                         
he headed commando raids against our most vulnerable campsites on                
the periphery of the main body. had i known it to be julian, i would have        
used his trump to try to hold him, but i only knew it after the fact.            
we’d lost perhaps two thousand men in the abrupt winter, and i didn’t            
yet know how many julian had accounted for.                                      
it seemed the troops were beginning to get demoralized, but they                 
followed when we ordered them ahead.                                             
the next day was one continuous ambush. a body of men the size of                
ours could not be allowed to deviate sufficiently to try to deal with the        
harassing raids julian led against our flanks. we got some of his men, but       
not enough, one for every ten of ours, perhaps.                                  
by high noon we were crossing the valley that paralleled the seacoast.           
the forest of arden was to the north and our left. amber lay directly            
ahead. the breezes were cool and filled with the odors of earth and its          
sweet growing things. a few leaves fell. amber lay eighty miles distant and      
was but a shimmer above the horizon.                                             
that afternoon, with a gathering of clouds and but the lightest of rains,        
the bolts began to fall from the heavens. then the storm ceased and the sun      
came forth to dry things off.                                                    
after a time, we smelled the smoke.                                              
after another time, we saw it, floating skyward all about us.                    
then the sheets of flame began to rise and fall. they moved toward us,           
with their crunching, constant footsteps; and as they came nearer, we began      
to feel the heat, and somewhere, way back along the lines, a panic arose.        
there were cries, and the columns swelled and welled forward.                    
we began to run.                                                                 
flakes of ash were falling about us now, and the smoke grew thicker.             
we sprinted ahead and the flames rushed even closer. the sheets of light         
and heat flapped a steady, welling thunder as we ran, and the waves of           
warmth beat upon us, washed over us. soon they were right there alongside        
us, and the trees blackened and the leaves flaked down, and some of the          
smaller trees began to sway. for as far ahead as we could see, our way was       
an alley of fires.                                                               
we ran faster. for soon things would be worse.                                   
and we were not mistaken.                                                        
big trees began to topple across our path. we leaped over them, we               
circled around them. at least, we were on a trail.                               
the heat became stifling and the breath came heavy in our lungs. deer            
and wolves and foxes and rabbits darted past us, fleeing with us, ignoring       
our presence and that of their natural enemies. the air above the smoke          
seemed filled with crying birds. their droppings fell among us, went             
unnoticed.                                                                       
to burn this ancient wood. as venerable as the forest of arden, seemed           
almost an act of sacrilege to me. but eric was prince in amber, and soon to      
be king. i suppose i might have, too.                                            
my eyebrows and hair were singed. my throat felt like a chimney. how             
many would this assault cost us? i wondered.                                     
seventy miles of wooded valley lay between us and amber, and over                
thirty behind us, going back to the forest’s end.                                
“bleys!” i gasped. “two or three miles ahead of us the trail forks! the          
right branch comes more quickly to the river oisen, which goes down to the       
sea! i think it’s our one chance! the whole valley of garnath is going to be     
burned! our only hope lies in reaching the water!”                               
he nodded.                                                                       
we raced on, but the fires outpaced us.                                          
we made it to the fork, though, beating out flames on our smoldering             
clothing. wiping ashes from our eyes, spitting such from our mouths,             
running hands through our hair when the flamelets nested there.                  
“only about a quarter mile more,” i said.                                        
i had been struck several times by falling boughs. all the exposed areas         
of my skin pulsed with a more than feverish pain, and many of the covered        
areas as well. we ran through burning grasses, heading down a long slope,        
and when we reached the bottom we saw the water, and our speed                   
increased, though we didn’t think it possible. we plunged in and let the cold    
wetness embrace in.                                                              
bleys and i contrived to float as near together as possible as the currents      
took us and we were swept along the twisting course of the oisen. the            
interlocked branches of the trees overhead had become as the beams in a          
cathedral of fire. as they broke apart and collapsed in places, we had to turn   
onto our bellies and swim or dive for the deepest places, depending on how       
near we were. the waters about us were filled with hissing and blackened         
debris, and at our backs our surviving troops’ heads in the river seemed as a    
strip of floating coconuts.                                                      
the waters were dark and cold and our wounds began to ache, and we               
shivered and our teeth chattered.                                                
it was several miles before we left the burning wood and reached the             
low, flat, treeless place that led on to the sea. it would be a perfect place for
julian to be waiting, with archers, i decided. i mentioned this to bleys and     
he agreed, but he didn’t reckon there was much we could do about it. i was       
forced to agree.                                                                 
the woods burned all around us, and we swam and we drifted.                      
it seemed like hours, but must have been less, before my fears began to          
materialize and the first volley of arrows descended.                            
i dove, and i swam underwater for a long distance. since i was going             
with the current, i made it quite a way along the river before i had to          
surface once more.                                                               
as i did, more arrows fell about me.                                             
the gods knew how long this gauntlet of death might be drawn, but i              
didn’t want to stick around and find out.                                        
i gulped air and dove once more.                                                 
i touched bottom, i felt my way among rocks.                                     
i moved along for as far as i could, then headed toward the right bank,          
exhaling as i rose.                                                              
i burst through the surface, gasped, took a deep breath and went down            
again, without sticking around to get the lay of the land.                       
i swam on till my lungs were bursting, and surfaced then.                        
this time i wasn’t quite so lucky. i took an arrow through my biceps. i          
managed to dive and break off the shaft when i struck bottom. then i pulled      
out the head and continued on by means of the frog kick and underbody            
sculling with my right hand. the next time up i’d be a sitting duck, i knew.     
so i forced myself on, till the red flashes crossed my eyeballs and the          
blackness crept into my head. i must have stayed down for three minutes.         
when i surfaced this time, though, nothing happened, and i trod water            
and gasped.                                                                      
i made my way to the left bank and grabbed hold of the trailing                  
undergrowth.                                                                     
i looked all around me. we were running short on trees at this point, and        
the fires hadn’t gotten this far. both banks seemed empty, but so did the        
river. could i have been the only survivor? it didn’t seem possible. after       
all, there had been so many of us when the last march began.                     
i was half dead with fatigue and my entire body was laced with aches             
and pains. every inch of my skin seemed to have been burned, but the             
waters were so cold that i was shaking and probably blue. i’d have to leave      
the river soon, if i wanted to live. i felt that i could manage a few more       
underwater expeditions, and i decided to chance them before departing            
from the sheltering depths.                                                      
somehow i managed four more laps, and i felt then that i might not               
come up again if i tried a fifth. so i hung onto a rock and caught my breath.    
then crawled ashore.                                                             
i rolled onto my back and looked all around. i didn’t recognize the              
locale. the fires hadn’t reached it yet, though. there was a thick clump of      
bushes off to my right and i crawled toward it, crawled into it, fell flat on    
my face and went to sleep.                                                       
when i awoke, i wished i hadn’t. every inch of me ached, and i was               
sick. i lay there for hours, half delirious, and finally managed to stagger      
back to the river for a long drink of water. then i headed back for the          
thicket, made it, and slept again.                                               
i was still sore when consciousness came once more, but a little bit             
stronger. i walked to the river and back, and by means of my icy trump           
found that bleys was still alive.                                                
“where are you?” he asked, when i had made the contact.                          
“damned if i know,” i replied. “lucky to be anywhere at all. near the            
sea, though. i can hear the waves and i know the smell.”                         
“you’re near the river?”                                                         
“yes.”                                                                           
“which bank?”                                                                    
“left, as you’d face the sea. north.”                                            
“then stay put,” he told me, “and i’ll send someone after you. i’m               
assembling our forces now. i’ve already got over two thousand together,          
and julian won’t come near us. more keep straggling in every minute.”            
“okay,” i said, and that was it.                                                 
i stayed put. i slept as i did so.                                               
i heard them bashing about in the bushes and was alert, i pushed some            
fronds aside and peered forth.                                                   
it was three of the big red guys.                                                
so i straightened my gear and brushed all my garments, ran a hand                
through my hair, stood erect and swayed, took several deep breaths, and          
stepped forth.                                                                   
“i am here,” i announced.                                                        
two of them did double-takes, blades in their hands, as i said it.               
but they recovered, smiled, paid me deference, and conducted me back             
to the camp. it was perhaps two miles distant. i made it without leaning.        
bleys appeared and said, “we’ve got over three thousand now.” then he            
called for a medical officer to take care of me again.                           
we were undisturbed all through the night, and the rest of our troops            
straggled in that night and the following day.                                   
we had perhaps five thousand by then. we could see amber in the                  
distance.                                                                        
we slept another night and on the following morning we set forth.                
by afternoon we had made maybe fifteen miles. we marched along the               
beach, and there was no sign of julian anywhere.                                 
the feeling of pain from my burns began to subside. my thigh was                 
healthy, but my shoulder and arm still hurt from here to hell and back again.    
we marched on, and soon we were within forty miles of amber. the                 
weather stayed clement and all of the wood to our left was a desolate,           
blackened ruin. the fire had destroyed most of the timber in the valley, so      
for once there was a thing in our favor. julian nor anybody else could           
ambush us. we’d see them coming a mile off. we made another ten miles            
ere the sun fell and we bivouacked on the beach.                                 
the next day, i remembered that eric’s coronation was near at hand and           
i reminded bleys. we had almost lost count of the days, but realized we still    
had a few remaining.                                                             
we led a speed-march till noon. then rested. by then, we were twenty-            
five miles away from the foot of kolvir. by twilight, the distance was ten.      
and we kept on. we marched till midnight and we bivouacked once                  
again. by that time, i was beginning to feel fairly alive once more. i           
practiced a few cuts with my blade and could almost manage them. the             
next day, i felt even better.                                                    
we marched until we came to the foot of kolvir, where we were met by             
all of julian’s forces, combined with many from caine’s fleet who now            
stood as foot soldiers.                                                          
bleys stood there and called things, like robert e. lee at                       
chancellorsville, and we took them.                                              
we bad maybe three thousand men when we had finished off everything              
julian had to throw against us. julian, of course, escaped.                      
but we had won. there was celebration that night. we had won.                    
i was very afraid by then, and i made my fears known to bleys. three             
thousand men against kolvir.                                                     
i had lost the fleet, and bleys had lost over ninety-eight percent of his        
foot soldiers. i did not look upon these as rejoiceable items.                   
i didn’t like it.                                                                
but the next day we began the ascent. there was a stairway, allowing             
for the men to go two abreast along it. this would narrow soon, however,         
forcing us to go single file.                                                    
we made it a hundred yards up kolvir, then two, then three.                      
then the storm blew in from the sea, and we held tight and were lashed           
by it.                                                                           
afterward, a couple of hundred men were missing.                                 
we struggled on and the rains came down. the way grew steeper, more              
slippery. a quarter of the way up kolvir we met with a column of armed           
men descending. the first of these traded blows with the leaders of our          
vanguard, and two men fell. two steps were gained, and another man fell.         
this went on for over an hour, and by then we were about a third of the          
way up and our line was wearing back toward bleys and myself. it was             
good that our big red warriors were stronger than eric’s troops. there           
would come a clash of arms, a cry, and a man would be brought by.                
sometimes he would be red, occasionally furry, but more often he wore            
eric’s colors.                                                                   
we made it to the halfway point, fighting for every step. once we                
reached the top, there would be the broad stair of which the one to rebma        
had been but an image. it would lead up to the great arch, which was the         
eastern entranceway to amber.                                                    
perhaps fifty of our vanguard remained. then forty, thirty, twenty,…             
we were about two-thirds of the way up by then, and the stair zigged             
and zagged its way back and forth across the face of kolvir. the eastern         
stair is seldom used. it is almost a decoration. our original plans had been     
to cut through the now blackened valley and then circle, climbing, and to        
take the western way over the mountains and enter amber from behind. the         
fire and julian had changed all this. we’d never have made it up and             
around. it was now a frontal assault or nothing. and it wasn’t going to be       
nothing.                                                                         
three more of eric’s warriors fell and we gained four steps. then our            
front man made the long descent and we lost one.                                 
the breeze was sharp and cool from off the sea, and birds were                   
collecting at the foot of the mountain. the sun broke through the clouds, as     
eric apparently put aside his weather making now that we were engaged            
with his force.                                                                  
we gained six steps and lost another man.                                        
it was strange and sad and wild…                                                 
bleys stood before me, and soon his turn would come. then mine,                  
should he perish.                                                                
six of the vanguard remained.                                                    
ten steps…                                                                       
then five remained.                                                              
we pushed on, slowly, and there was blood on every step for as far back          
as i could see. there’s a moral there, somewhere.                                
the fifth man slew four before he fell himself, so bringing us to another        
zig, or zag, as the case may be.                                                 
onward and upward, our third man fighting with a blade in either hand.           
it was good that he fought in a holy war, for there was real zeal behind each    
blow. he took three before he died.                                              
the next wasn’t as zealous, or as good with his blades. he fell                  
immediately, and then there were two.                                            
bleys drew his long, filigreed blade, and its edge sparkled in the sun.          
“soon, brother,” he said, “we will see what they can do against a                
prince.”                                                                         
“only one, i hope.” i replied. and he chuckled.                                  
i’d say we were three-quarters of the way there when bleys’ turn finally         
came.                                                                            
he leaped forward, immediately dislodging the first man to face him.             
the point of his blade found the throat of the second, and the flat of it fell   
alongside the head of the third, dislodging him also. he dueled a moment         
with the fourth and dispatched him.                                              
my own blade was in my hand, ready, as i watched and advanced.                   
he was good, even better than i remembered him to be. he advanced                
like a whirlwind, and his blade was alive with light. they fell before it—       
how they fell, my friend! whatever else you might say of bleys, on that day      
he acquitted himself as became his rank. i wondered how long he could            
keep going.                                                                      
he’d a dagger in his left hand, which he used with brutal efficiency             
whenever he could manage a corps à corps. he left it in the throat of his        
eleventh victim.                                                                 
i could see no end to the column which opposed us. i decided that it             
must stretch all the way to the landing at the top. i hoped my turn wouldn’t     
come. i almost believed it.                                                      
three more men plummeted past me and we came to a small landing                  
and a turn. he cleared the landing and began the ascent. for half an hour i      
watched him, and they died and they died. i could hear the murmurs of awe        
from the men behind me. i almost thought he could make it to the top.            
he used every trick available. he baffled blades and eyes with his cloak.        
he tripped the warriors. he seized wrists and twisted, with his full strength.   
we made it to another landing. there was some blood on his sleeve by             
then, but he smiled constantly, and the warriors behind the warriors he          
killed were ashen. this helped him, too. and perhaps the fact that i stood       
ready to fill the gap also contributed to their fears and so slowed them,        
worked on their nerves. they’d heard of the naval engagement, i later            
learned.                                                                         
bleys worked his way to the next landing, cleared it, turned again,              
began to ascend. i hadn’t thought he could make it that far, then. i didn’t      
think i could make it as far as he had. it was the most phenomenal display       
of swordsmanship and endurance i’d seen since benedict had held the pass         
above arden against the moonriders out of ghenesh.                               
he was tiring, though, i could see that, too. if only there were some way        
for me to relieve him, to spell him for a time.                                  
but there wasn’t. so i followed, fearing every stroke might be his last.         
i knew that he was weakening. we were within a hundred feet of the top           
at that point.                                                                   
i suddenly felt for him. he was my brother and he’d done well by me. i           
don’t think he thought he’d make it then, yet he was fighting on… in effect,     
giving me my chance for the throne.                                              
he killed three more men, and his blade moved more slowly each time.             
he fought with the fourth for perhaps five minutes before he took him. i         
was certain the next would he his last.                                          
he wasn’t, though.                                                               
as he slew that man, i transferred my blade from my right hand to my             
left, drew my dagger with my right and threw it.                                 
it went in up to the hilt, in the throat of the next man. bleys sprang over      
two steps and hamstrung the man before him, casting him downward.                
then he cut upward, ripping open the belly of the one behind that one.           
i rushed to fill the gap, to be tight behind him and ready. he didn’t need       
me yet, though.                                                                  
he took the next two, with a new burst of energy. i called for another           
dagger and one was passed to me from somewhere along the line.                   
i kept it ready till he slowed once more, and i used it on the man he            
fought.                                                                          
the man was lunging as it spun in, so the hilt rather than the blade             
caught him. it struck against his head, though, and bleys pushed against his     
shoulder and he fell. but the next man leaped forward, and though he             
impaled himself, he struck bleys upon the shoulder and they went over the        
edge together.                                                                   
by reflex, almost without knowing what i was doing, yet knowing fully            
in one of those microsecond decisions you justify after the fact, my left        
hand leaped to my belt, whipped out my pack of the trumps and cast them          
toward bleys as he seemed to hang there for an instant—so rapidly did my         
muscles and perceptions respond—and i cried out, “catch them, you fool!”         
and he did.                                                                      
i didn’t have time to see what happened next, as i parried and thrust.           
then began the final lap of our journey up kolvir.                               
let’s just say i made it and was gasping, as my troops came over the             
edge to support me there on the landing.                                         
we consolidated our forces and pressed ahead.                                    
it took us an hour to reach the great arch.                                      
we passed through. we entered amber.                                             
wherever eric was, i’m sure he’d never guessed we’d make it this far.            
and i wondered where bleys was? had he gotten a chance to grab a                 
tramp and use it, before he reached the bottom? i guessed that i’d never         
know.                                                                            
we had underestimated, all the way around. we were outnumbered now,              
and the only thing left to do was to fight on for as long as we could hold       
out. why had i done such a foolish thing as throw bleys my trumps? i             
knew he had none of his own and that’s what had dictated my response,            
conditioned perhaps by my years on the shadow earth, but i might have            
used them to escape, if things went badly.                                       
things went badly.                                                               
we fought on until twilight, and by then there was only a small band of          
us remaining.                                                                    
we were surrounded at a point a thousand yards within amber, and still           
far from the palace. we were fighting a defensive fight, and one by one we       
died. we were overwhelmed.                                                       
llewella or deirdre would have given me sanctuary. why had i done it?            
i killed another man and put the question out of my mind.                        
the sun went down and darkness filled the sky. we were down to a few             
hundred by then, and not much closer to the palace.                              
then i saw eric and heard him shouting orders. if only i could reach             
him!                                                                             
but i couldn’t.                                                                  
i’d probably have surrendered, to save my remaining troops, who had              
served me far too well.                                                          
but there was no one to surrender to, no one asking for a surrender. eric        
couldn’t even hear me if i cried out. he was out of the way, directing. so       
we fought on, and i was down to a hundred men.                                   
let’s be brief.                                                                  
they killed everyone but me.                                                     
at me they threw nets and unleashed blunted arrows.                              
finally, i fell and was clubbed and hog-tied, and then everything went           
away but a nightmare which attached itself and wouldn’t let go, no matter        
what.                                                                            
we had lost.                                                                     
i awoke in a dungeon far below amber, sorry that i had made it that far.         
the fact that i still lived meant that eric had plans for me. i visualized       
racks and braces, flames and tongs. i foresaw my coming degradation as i         
lay there on the damp straw.                                                     
how long had i been unconscious? i did not know.                                 
i searched my cell for a means of committing suicide. i found nothing            
that would serve this purpose.                                                   
all my wounds blazed like suns, and i was so very tired.                         
i lay me down and slept once more.                                               
i awakened, and still no one came to me. there was none to buy, none             
to torture.                                                                      
also, there was nothing for me to eat.                                           
i lay there, wrapped in my cloak, and i reviewed everything that had             
happened since i’d awakened in greenwood and refused my hypo. better,            
perhaps, if i hadn’t.                                                            
i knew despair.                                                                  
soon eric would be crowned king in amber. this thing might already               
have occurred.                                                                   
but sleep was so lovely a thing, and i so tired.                                 
it was the first real chance i’d had to rest and forget my wounds.               
the cell was so dark arid smelly and damp.                                       
                                                                    
chapter 8                                                                        
how many times i awakened and returned to sleep, i do not know. twice i          
found bread and meat and water on a tray by the door. both times, i emptied      
the tray. my cell was almost pitch dark and very chilly. i waited there, and i   
waited.                                                                          
then they came for me.                                                           
the door swung open and a feeble light entered. i blinked at it as i was         
called forth.                                                                    
the corridor without was filled to overflowing with armed men, so i              
wasn’t about to try anything.                                                    
i rubbed at the stubble on my chin and went where they took me.                  
after a long walk, we came to the hall of the spiral stair and began to          
ascend. i asked no questions as we moved, and no one offered me any              
information.                                                                     
when we reached the top, i was conducted further into the palace                 
proper. they took me to a warm, clean room and ordered me to strip, which        
i did. then i entered a steaming tub of water, and a servant came forth and      
scrubbed me and shaved me and trimmed my hair.                                   
when i was dry again, i was given fresh garments, of black and of                
silver.                                                                          
i donned them, and a black cloak was hung about my shoulders, its                
clasp a silver rose.                                                             
“you are ready,” said the sergeant of the guard. “come this way.”                
i followed him, and the guard followed me.                                       
i was taken far to the back of the palace where a smith placed manacles          
about my wrists, fetters on my ankles, with chains upon them too heavy for       
me to break. had i resisted, i knew i would have been beaten unconscious         
and the result would have been the same. i had no desire to be beaten            
unconscious again, so i complied.                                                
then the chains were taken up by several of the guards, and i was led            
back toward the front of the palace. i had no eyes for the magnificence that     
lay all about me. i was a prisoner. i would probably soon be dead or on the      
rack. there was nothing i could do right now. a glance out of the window         
showed me that it was early evening, and there was no place for nostalgia as     
i passed through rooms where we had played as children.                          
i was led up a long corridor and into the great dining room.                     
there were tables all over the place, and people seated all about them,          
many of whom i knew.                                                             
all the fine gowns and suits of amber burned about me on the bodies of           
the nobles, and there was music beneath the torchlight and food already          
upon the tables, though no one was eating yet.                                   
i saw faces that i recognized, like flora’s, and some strange faces. there       
was the minstrel. lord rein—yes, he had been knighted, by me—whom i              
had not seen in centuries. he turned his eyes away when my gaze fell upon        
him.                                                                             
i was taken to the foot of the huge center table and seated there.               
the guards stayed and stood behind me. they fastened the ends of my              
chains to rings fresh-set in the floor. the seat at the head of my table was as  
yet unoccupied.                                                                  
i did not recognize the woman to my right, but the man to my left was            
julian. i ignored him and stared at the lady, a little wisp of a blonde.         
“good evening,” i said. “i don’t believe we’ve been introduced. my               
name is corwin.”                                                                 
she looked at the man at her right for support, a heavy, redheaded guy           
with lots of freckles. he looked away and suddenly became engaged in an          
animated conversation with the woman to his right.                               
“it’s all right to talk with me, honest,” i said. “it’s not contagious.          
she managed a weak smile and said, “i’m carmel. how are you, prince              
corwin?”                                                                         
“that’s a sweet name,” i replied, “and i’m just fine. what’s a nice girl         
like you doing in a place like this?”                                            
she took a quick drink of water.                                                 
“corwin,” said julian, louder than necessary. “i think the lady finds you        
offensive and obnoxious.”                                                        
“what’s she said to you so far this evening?” and he didn’t blush. he            
whitened.                                                                        
“that will be enough from you.”                                                  
i stretched then, and rattled my chains on purpose. outside of the effect        
it produced, it also showed me how much slack i had. not enough, of              
course. eric had been careful.                                                   
“come closer and whisper me your objections, brother,” i said.                   
but he didn’t.                                                                   
i had been the last to be seated, so i knew the time was near at hand.           
and it was.                                                                      
there came five trumpet notes from six trumpets and eric entered the             
hall.                                                                            
everybody stood.                                                                 
except for me.                                                                   
the guards had to drag me to my feet by means of the chains and hold             
me there.                                                                        
eric smiled and descended the stair to my right. i could barely see his          
own colors beneath the ermine robe that he wore.                                 
he moved to the head of the table and stood before his chair. a servant          
came and stood behind him, and the wine stewards made their rounds,              
pouring.                                                                         
when all the glasses were filled, he raised his.                                 
“may you dwell forever in amber,” he said, “which endureth forever,”             
and everyone raised his glass.                                                   
except for me.                                                                   
“pick it up!” said julian.                                                       
“shove it up,” said i.                                                           
he didn’t, only glared. but i leaned forward quickly then and raised my          
glass.                                                                           
there were a couple hundred people between us, but my voice carried.             
and eric’s eyes were upon me all the while, as i said, “to eric, who sits at     
the foot of the table!”                                                          
no one moved to touch me as julian emptied his glass upon the floor.             
all the others did the same, but i managed to quaff most of mine, before it      
was struck from my hand.                                                         
eric seated himself then and the nobles followed suit, and i was released        
to fall into my chair.                                                           
the serving began, and since i was hungry i ate as well as the rest of           
them, and better than most.                                                      
there was constant music and the meal lasted for over two hours. no              
one said a word to me during the whole time, and i said nothing more             
myself. but my presence was felt, and our table was quieter than the others.     
caine sat farther up along the table. at eric’s right hand. i gathered that      
julian was out of favor. neither random nor deirdre was present. there           
were many other nobles whom i recognized. some of whom i had once                
counted as friends, but none of these would return my glances.                   
i gathered then that it only required a small formality for eric to be king      
in amber.                                                                        
and this followed shortly.                                                       
after dinner, there were no speeches eric simply stood.                          
there came another flash of trumpets and a raucous sound upon the air.           
then there was a procession, leading all the way to the throne room of           
amber.                                                                           
i knew what was coming next.                                                     
eric stood before the throne and everybody bowed.                                
except for me, that is, and i was forced to my knees anyway.                     
today was the day of his coronation.                                             
there was silence. then caine bore in the cushion which held the                 
crown, the crown of amber. he knelt and froze in that position, offering it.     
then i was jerked to my feet and dragged forward. i knew what was                
about to happen. it came upon me in a flash, and i fought. but i was beaten      
down and brought to my knees at the foot of the stair before the throne.         
the music rose up softly-it was “greensleeves”-and somewhere at my               
back julian said, “behold the crowning of a new king in amber!” then to          
me, in a whisper, “take up the crown and hand it to eric. he will crown          
himself.”                                                                        
i stared at the crown of amber upon the crimson cushion caine held.              
it was wrought of silver and had seven high points, each topped by a             
gem stone. it was studded with emeralds, and there were two huge rubies at       
either temple.                                                                   
i didn’t move, thinking of the times i had seen the face of our father           
beneath it.                                                                      
“no,” i said simply, and i felt a blow upon my left check.                       
“take it and give it to eric,” he repeated.                                      
i tried to strike at him, but my chains were drawn tight. i was struck           
again.                                                                           
i stared at the high sharp peaks.                                                
“very well,” i finally said, and reached for it.                                 
i held it in both hands for a moment then quickly placed it on my own            
head and declared, “i crown me, corwin, king of amber!”                          
it was removed immediately and replaced upon the cushion. several                
blows fell upon my back. there came a murmuring throughout the hall.             
“now pick it up and try it again,” said julian. “take it and hand it to          
eric.”                                                                           
another blow fell.                                                               
“okay,” i told him, feeling my shirt grow wet.                                   
this time i hurled it, hoping to put out one of eric’s eyes.                     
he caught it in his right hand and smiled down at me as i was beaten.            
“thank you,” he said. “now hear me, all you present, and those of you            
who listen in shadow. i assume the crown and throne this day. i take into        
my hand the scepter of the kingdom of amber. i have won the throne fairly,       
and i take it and hold it by the right of my blood.”                             
“liar!” i cried, and a hand was clapped over my mouth.                           
“i crown myself eric the first, king of amber.”                                  
“long live the king!” cried the nobles, three times.                             
then he leaned forward and whispered to me, “your eyes have looked               
upon the fairest sight they will ever hold… guards! take corwin away to          
the smithy, and let his eyes be burnt from out his head! let him remember        
the sights of this day as the last he might ever see! then cast him into the     
darkness of the deepest dungeon beneath amber, and let his name be               
forgotten!”                                                                      
i spat and was beaten.                                                           
i fought every step of the way, but was taken forth from the hall. no one        
would look upon me as i went, and the last thing i remember was the sight        
of eric seated upon the throne, pronouncing his blessing upon the nobles of      
amber, and smiling.                                                              
that which he said was done to me, and mercifully i fainted before it            
was finished.                                                                    
i have no idea how much later it was that i awakened within absolute             
blackness and felt the terrible pains within my head. perhaps it was then        
that i pronounced the curse, or perhaps it had been at the time that the         
white-hot irons had descended. i don’t remember. but i knew that eric            
would never rest easy upon the throne, for the curse of a prince of amber,       
pronounced in a fullness of fury, is always potent.                              
i clawed at the straw, in the absolute blackness of my cell, and no tears        
came. that was the horror of it. after a time—only you and i, gods, know         
how long—sleep came again                                                        
when i awakened. there was still the pain. i rose to my feet. i measured         
off the dimensions of my cell. four paces in width, five in length. there        
was a lavatory hole in the floor and a straw-tick mattress in a corner. the      
door contained a small slot at the bottom, and behind it there was a tray        
which held a stale piece of bread and a bottle of water. i ate and i drank, but  
i was not refreshed.                                                             
my head ached so, and there was nothing of peace within me.                      
i slept as much as i could, and no one came to see me. i awakened and            
crossed my cell and felt for food and ate it when i found it. i slept as much    
as i could.                                                                      
after seven sleeps, the pain was gone from out my eye sockets. i hated           
my brother who was king in amber. better he had killed me.                       
i wondered at the popular reaction, but could not guess.                         
when the darkness reached as far as amber, however, i knew that eric             
would have his regrets. this much i knew, and this comforted me.                 
thus began my days of darkness, and i had no way of measuring their              
passage. even if i had had eyes, i could not have distinguished day from         
night in that place.                                                             
time went on its way, ignoring me. there were occasions when i broke             
into a sweat over this and shivered. had i been there months? only hours?        
or weeks? or had it been years?                                                  
i forgot all about time. i slept, i paced (i knew exactly where to place         
my feet and when to turn), and i reflected upon things i had done and hadn’t     
done. sometimes i would sit cross-legged and breathe slowly and deeply,          
and empty my mind and keep it that way for as long as i could. this helped       
—thinking of nothing.                                                            
eric had been clever. although the power lived within me, now it was             
useless. a blind man cannot walk among shadows.                                  
my beard had grown down to my chest and my hair was long. i was                  
always hungry at first, but after a time my appetite waned. sometimes i          
grew dizzy when i stood up too rapidly.                                          
i could still see, in my nightmares, but this hurt me even more when i           
awakened.                                                                        
later, though, i felt somewhat distant from the events which had led up          
to this. it was almost as though they had happened to a different person.        
and this, too, was true.                                                         
i had lost a lot of weight. i could visualize myself, pallid and thin. i         
couldn’t even cry, though i felt like it a couple of times. there was            
something wrong with my tear ducts. it was a dreadful thing that any man         
should be brought to this.                                                       
then one day there came a light scratching upon the door. i ignored it.          
it came again, and still i did not respond.                                      
then i heard my name whispered, in the interrogative.                            
i crossed the cell.                                                              
“yes?” i replied.                                                                
“it’s me, rein,” he said. “how are you?”                                         
i laughed at that.                                                               
“fine! oh just fine!” i said. “steak and champagne every night, and              
dancing girls. god! you should make the scene sometime!”                         
“i’m sorry,” he said, “that there is nothing i can do for you,” and i could      
feel the pain in his voice.                                                      
“i know.” i said.                                                                
“i would if i could,” he told me.                                                
“i know that, too.”                                                              
“i brought you something. here.”                                                 
the little gate at the bottom of the cell door creaked slightly as it swung      
inward several times.                                                            
“what is it?” i asked.                                                           
“some clean clothes,” he said, “and three loaves of fresh bread, a head          
of cheese, some beef, two bottles of wine, a carton of cigarettes, and a lot of  
matches.”                                                                        
my voice caught in my throat.                                                    
“thanks, rein. you’re all right. how did you arrange this?”                      
“i know the guard who’s standing duty this shift. he won’t talk. he              
owes me too much.”                                                               
“he might try to cancel his debts by squealing,” i said. “so don’t do it         
again—much as i appreciate it. needless to say, i’ll dispose of the              
evidence.”                                                                       
“i wish it had turned out different, corwin.”                                    
“you and me both. thanks for thinking of me when you were ordered                
not to.”                                                                         
“that part was easy.” he said.                                                   
“how long have i been in this place?”                                            
“four months and ten days,” he said.                                             
“so what’s new in amber?”                                                        
“erie reigns. that’s all.”                                                       
“where’s julian?”                                                                
“back in the forest of arden with his guard.”                                    
“why?”                                                                           
“some strange things made it through shadow recently.”                           
“i see. how about caine?”                                                        
“he’s still in amber, enjoying himself. wenching and drinking, mostly.”          
“and gerard?”                                                                    
“he’s admiral of the entire fleet.”                                              
i sighed with a bit of relief. i was afraid his withdrawal during the naval      
engagement might have cost him something with eric.                              
“and what of random?”                                                            
“he’s up the hall aways.”                                                        
“what? he was taken?”                                                            
“yes. he walked the pattern in rebma and showed up here, with a                  
crossbow. he wounded eric before he was taken.”                                  
“really? why wasn’t he slain?”                                                   
“well, rumor has it he’s married a noblewoman of rebma. eric didn’t              
want to court an incident with rebma at this point. moire has quite a            
kingdom, and there is talk that eric is even considering asking her to be his    
queen. all gossip, of course. but interesting.”                                  
“yes “ i said                                                                    
“she liked you, didn’t she?”                                                     
“somewhat. how did you hear?”                                                    
“i was present when random was sentenced. i got to speak with him for            
a moment. the lady vialle, who claims to be his wife, has asked to join          
him in prison. eric is not yet certain how to reply.”                            
i thought upon the blind girl, who i had never met, and i wondered at            
this.                                                                            
“how long ago did all this happen?” i asked.                                     
“mm. thirty-four days,” he replied. “that was when random showed                 
up. a week later, vialle made her request.”                                      
“she must be a strange woman, if she really loves random.”                       
“those were my sentiments,” he replied. “i can’t think of a more                 
unusual combination.”                                                            
“if you should get to see him again, give him my regards and my                  
regrets.”                                                                        
“yes.”                                                                           
“how fare my sisters?”                                                           
“deirdre and llewella remain in rebma. the lady florimel has been                
enjoying eric’s favors and stands high in the present court. i do not know       
where fiona is presently.”                                                       
“has anything more been heard of bleys? i am sure that he died.”                 
“he must have died,” said rein, “his body was never recovered,                   
though.”                                                                         
“what of benedict?”                                                              
“as absent as ever.”                                                             
“how about brand?”                                                               
“no word.”                                                                       
“then i guess that covers the whole family tree, as it stands at present.        
have you written any new ballads?”                                               
“no,” he said. “i’m still working on ‘the siege of amber,’ but it will be        
an underground hit, if at all.”                                                  
i reached my hand out through the tiny gate at the bottom of the door.           
“i would clasp hands with thee,” i said, and i felt his hand touch mine.         
“it was good of thee to do this thing for me. don’t do it again, though. it      
would he foolish to risk eric’s wrath.”                                          
he squeezed my hand, muttered something, and was gone.                           
i found his care package and stuffed myself with the meat, which was             
the most perishable item. i ate a lot of the bread. to accompany it, and i       
realized that i had almost forgotten how good food can taste. then i grew        
drowsy and slept. i don’t think i slept very long, and when i awoke i            
opened one of the bottles of wine.                                               
it didn’t take as much as usual, in my weakened condition, to get me             
kind of high. i had a cigarette. sat down on my mattress, leaned back            
against the wall, and mused.                                                     
i remembered rein as a child. i was already full grown by then and he            
was a candidate for court jester. a thin, wise kid. people had kidded him too    
much. me included. but i wrote music, composed ballads, and he’d picked          
up a lute somewhere and had taught himself how to use it. soon we were           
singing with voices together raised and all like that, and before long i took a  
liking to him and we worked together. practicing the martial arts. he was        
lousy at them. but i felt kind of sorry for the way i had treated him earlier,   
what with the way he had dug my stuff, so i forced the fake graces upon          
him and also made him a passable saber man. i’d never regretted it, and i        
guess he didn’t either. before long, he became minstrel to the court of          
amber. i had called him my page all that while, and when the wars                
beckoned, against the dark things out of shadow called weirmonken, i             
made him my squire, and we had ridden off to the wars together. i knighted       
him upon the battlefield, at jones falls, and he had deserved it. after that,    
he had gone on to become my better when it came to the ways of words and         
music. his colors were crimson and his words were golden. i loved him, as        
one of my two or three friends in amber. i didn’t think he’d take the risk he    
had to bring me a decent meal, though. i didn’t think anyone would. i had        
another drink and smoked another cigarette, in his name, to celebrate him.       
he was a good man. i wondered how long he would survive.                         
i threw all the butts into the head and also—eventually—the empty                
bottle. i didn’t want anything around to show that i had been “enjoying”         
myself, should a sudden inspection be held. i ate all the good food he had       
brought me, and i felt surfeited for the first time since i had been in          
durance. i saved the last bottle for one massive spell of drunkenness and        
forgetfulness.                                                                   
and after that time had passed, i returned to my cycle of recriminations.        
i hoped, mainly, that eric had no measure of our complete powers. he             
was king in amber, granted, but he didn’t know everything. not yet. not          
the way dad had known. there was a million-in-one shot that might still          
work in my favor. so much so, and so different that at least it served to        
grant me my small purchase upon sanity, there in the grip of despair.            
but maybe i did go mad for a time, i don’t know. there are days that are         
great blanks to me now, as i stand here on the brink of chaos. god knows         
what they held, and i’ll never see a shrink to find out.                         
there are none of you, good doctors, could cope with my family,                  
anyway.                                                                          
i lay there and i paced there, within the numbing darkness. i grew quite         
sensitive to sounds. i listened to the scurry of rats’ feet through straw, the   
distant moaning of other prisoners, the echoes of a guard’s footsteps as he      
approached with a tray of food. i began estimating distances and direction       
from things like this.                                                           
i suppose i became more sensitive to odors also, but i tried not to think        
about them too much. aside from the imaginable nauseating ones there             
was, for a long while, what i would swear to be the odor of decaying flesh. i    
wondered, if i were to die, how long would it be before someone took             
notice? how many chunks of bread and bowls of slop would go uneaten              
before the guard thought to check within after my continued existence?           
the answer to that one could be very important.                                  
the death odor was around for a long while. i tried to think in terms of         
time again, and it seemed that it persisted for over a week.                     
though i rationed myself carefully, resisting the compulsion, the handy          
temptation, for as long as i could, i finally found myself down to my final      
pack of cigarettes.                                                              
i tore it open and lit one. i had had a carton of salems and i had smoked        
eleven packs. that was two hundred and twenty cigarettes. i had once timed       
myself with one, and it had taken me seven minutes to smoke it. that made        
for a total of one thousand five hundred and forty minutes spent smoking,        
or twenty-five hours and forty minutes. i was sure i had spent at least an       
hour between cigarettes, more like an hour and a half. say an hour and a         
half. now figure that i was sleeping six to eight hours per day. that left       
sixteen to eighteen waking hours. i guessed i was smoking ten or twelve per      
day. so that meant maybe three weeks had passed since rein’s visit. he had       
told me it was four months and ten days since the coronation, which meant        
that it was now around five months.                                              
i nursed my last pack, enjoying each one like a love affair. when they           
were all gone, i felt depressed.                                                 
then a lot more time must have passed.                                           
i got to wondering about eric. how was he making out as liege? what              
problems was he encountering? what was he up to right now? why hadn’t            
he been around to torment me? could i ever truly be forgotten in amber,          
even by imperial decree? never, i decided.                                       
and what of my brothers? why had none of them contacted me? it                   
would be so easy to draw forth my trump and break eric’s decree. none            
did, though.                                                                     
i thought for a long while upon moire, the last woman i had loved.               
what was she doing? did she think of me ever? probably not. maybe she            
was eric’s mistress by now, or his queen. did she ever speak to him of me?       
again. probably not.                                                             
and what of my sisters? forget it. bitches all, they.                            
i had been blinded once before, by a cannon flashback in the eighteenth          
century on the shadow earth. but it had only lasted for around a month and       
my sight had returned. eric had had a permanent thing in mind, however,          
when he had given his order. i still perspired and shuddered, and sometimes      
woke up screaming, whenever memory of the white-hot irons returned to            
me—hung there before my eyes—and then the contact!                               
i moaned softly and continued to pace.                                           
there was absolutely nothing i could do. that was the most horrible              
part of the whole thing. i was as helpless as an embryo. to be born again        
into sight and fury was a thing for which i would give my soul. even for an      
hour, with a blade in my band, to duel once again with my brother.               
i lay back on my mat and slept. when i awakened, there was food, and i           
ate once again and paced. my fingernails and my toenails had grown long.         
my beard was very long and my hair fell across my eyes, constantly. i felt       
filthy, and i itched all the time. i wondered whether i had fleas.               
that a prince of amber could be brought to this state drew a terrible            
emotion from the center of my being, wherever that may be. i had been            
reared to think of us as invincible entities, clean and cool and diamond-        
hard, like our pictures on the trumps. obviously, we were not.                   
at least, we were enough like other men to have our resources.                   
i played mental games, i told myself stories, i reviewed pleasant                
memories—there were many of these. i recalled the elements: wind, rain,          
snow, the summer’s warmth, and the spring’s cool breezes. i had had a            
small airplane on the shadow earth, and when i flew it i had enjoyed the         
sensation. i recalled the glistening panoramas of color and distance, the        
miniaturization of cities, the broad blue sweep of sky, the herds of clouds      
(where were they now?) and the clean expanse of the ocean beneath my             
wings. i remembered women i had loved, parties, military engagements.            
and when all was done, and i could help it no longer, i thought of amber.        
one time, when i did so, my tear glands began to function again. i wept.         
after an interminable time, a time filled with blackness and many                
sleeps, i heard footsteps which paused before the door to my cell, and i         
heard the sound of a key within the lock.                                        
it was a time so long after rein’s visit that i had forgotten the taste of       
the wine and the cigarettes. i could not realty estimate its span, but it had    
been long.                                                                       
there were two men in the corridor. i could tell this from their footsteps       
even before i heard the sounds of their voices.                                  
one of the voices i recognized.                                                  
the door swung open and julian said my name.                                     
i didn’t answer right away, and he repeated it.                                  
“corwin? come here.”                                                             
since i didn’t have much choice in the matter, i drew myself erect and           
advanced. i stopped when i knew i was near him.                                  
“what do you want?” i asked.                                                     
“come with me.” and he took my arm.                                              
we walked along the corridor, and he said nothing and i’d be damned if           
i’d ask him any questions.                                                       
from the echoes, i could tell when we entered the big hall. soon after,          
he guided me up the stair.                                                       
up, and into the palace proper we went.                                          
i was taken to a room and seated in a chair. a barber set to work cutting        
my hair and my beard. i didn’t recognize his voice when he asked me if i         
wanted the beard trimmed or removed.                                             
“cut it off,” i said, and a manicurist set to work on my nails, all twenty       
of them.                                                                         
then i was bathed, and someone helped me to dress in clean garments.             
they hung loose on me. i was loused also, but forget that.                       
then i was led into another black place filled with music and the odors          
of good food and the sounds of many voices and some laughter. i                  
recognized it to be the dining room.                                             
the voices subsided a bit as julian led me in and seated me.                     
i sat there until the trumpet notes, to which i was forced to rise.              
i heard the toast called out:                                                    
“to eric the first, king of amber! long live the king!”                          
i didn’t drink to that, but no one seemed to notice. it was caine’s voice        
that had called out the toast, from far up along the table.                      
i ate as much as i could, because it was the best meal i had been offered        
since the coronation. i gathered from conversation overheard that today was      
the anniversary of eric’s coronation, which meant i had spent an entire year     
in the dungeons.                                                                 
no one spoke to me. and i didn’t make any overtures. i was present as a          
ghost only. to humiliate me, and to serve as a reminder to my brothers, no       
doubt, as to the price of defying our liege. and everyone had been ordered       
to forget me.                                                                    
it went on well into the night. someone kept me well provided with               
wine, which was something, and i sat there and listened to the music of all      
the dances.                                                                      
the tables had been removed by this time, and i was seated off                   
somewhere in a corner.                                                           
i got stinking drunk and was half dragged, half carried back to my cell          
in the morning, when the whole thing was over save for the cleaning up.          
my only regret was that i hadn’t gotten sick enough to dirty the floor or        
someone’s pretty garments.                                                       
thus ended the first year of darkness.                                           
                                                                    
chapter 9                                                                        
i shall not bore you with repetition. my second year was pretty much like        
my first, with the same finale. ditto for the third. rein came twice that        
second year, with a basket of goodies and a mouthful of gossip. both times       
i forbade him ever to come again. the third year he came down six times,         
every other month, and each time i forbade him anew and ate his food and         
heard what he had to say.                                                        
something was wrong in amber. strange things walked through                      
shadow and presented themselves, with violence, to all and sundry. they          
were destroyed, of course. eric was still trying to figure out how they had      
occurred. i did not mention my curse, though i later rejoiced in the fact that   
it had come to pass.                                                             
random, like myself, was still a prisoner. his wife had joined him. the          
positions of my other brothers and sisters remained unchanged. this              
bolstered me through the third anniversary of the coronation, and it made        
me feel almost alive again.                                                      
light—                                                                           
light! one day it was there, and it made me feel so good that i                  
immediately broke out the final bottle of wine rein had brought me and           
opened the last pack of cigarettes, which i had been saving.                     
i smoked them and sipped and enjoyed the feeling that i had somehow              
beaten eric. if he found this out, i felt it might be fatal. but i knew he didn’t
know.                                                                            
so i rejoiced, smoking. drinking and reveling in the light of that which         
had occurred.                                                                    
yes, the light.                                                                  
i’d discovered a tiny patch of brightness, off somewhere to my right.            
well, let’s take it like this: i had awakened in a hospital bed and learned      
that i had recovered all too soon. dig?                                          
i heal faster than others who have been broken. all the lords and ladies         
of amber have something of this capacity.                                        
i’d lived through the plague, i’d lived through the march on moscow.             
i regenerate faster and better than anybody i’ve ever known.                     
napoleon had once made a remark about it. so had general macarthur.              
with nerve tissue it takes me a bit longer, that’s all.                          
my sight was returning to me, that’s what it meant—that lovely patch of          
brightness, off somewhere to my right.                                           
after a time, i knew that it was the little barren area in the door to my        
cell.                                                                            
i had grown new eyes, my fingers told me. it had taken me over three             
years, but i had done it. it was the million-to-one thing i spoke of earlier,    
the thing which even eric could not properly assess, because of the              
variances of powers among the individual members of the family. i had            
beaten him to this extent: i had learned that i could grow new eyeballs. i       
had always known that i could regenerate nerve tissues, given sufficient         
time. i had been left paraplegic from a spine injury received during the         
franco-prussian wars. after two years, it had gone away. i had had my            
hope—a wild one, i’ll admit—that i could do what i had done then, with           
my burned-out orbs. and i had been right. they felt intact, and the sight        
was returning, slowly.                                                           
how long till the next anniversary of eric’s coronation? i stopped               
pacing and my heart beat faster. as soon as someone saw that i’d recovered       
my eyes, i’d lose them again.                                                    
therefore, i’d have to escape before the four years had passed.                  
how?                                                                             
i hadn’t thought about it much up to this time, because even if i could          
figure a way to get out of my cell, i’d never make it out of amber—or out        
of the palace, for that matter—without eyes or aid, and neither were             
available to me.                                                                 
now, though…                                                                     
the door of my cell was a big, heavy, brass-bound thing, with only a             
tiny grille at a height of about five feet for purposes of looking in to see     
whether i was still alive, if anyone cared. even if i succeeded in removing      
it, i could tell that i couldn’t reach out far enough to touch the lock. there   
was a little swinging gate at the bottom of the door, large enough to push       
my food through and that’s about all. the hinges were either on the outside      
or in between the door and the jamb, i couldn’t tell for sure. either way, i     
couldn’t get at them. there were no windows and no other doors.                  
it was still almost like being blind, save for that feeble reassuring light      
through the grille. i knew my sight hadn’t returned fully. that was still a      
long way off. but even if it had, it was nearly pitch dark in there. i knew      
this because i knew the dungeons under amber.                                    
i lit a cigarette, paced some more, and assessed my possessions, seeking         
anything that might be of aid. there was my clothing, my sleeping mat, and       
all the damp straw i wanted. i also had matches, but i quickly rejected the      
notion of setting fire to the straw. i doubted anyone would come and open        
the door if i did. most likely the guard would come and laugh, if he came at     
all. i had a spoon i’d picked up at the last banquet. i’d wanted a knife,        
really, but julian had caught me trying to lift one and snatched it away.        
what he didn’t know, though, was that that was my second attempt. i              
already had the spoon tucked inside my boot                                      
so what good was it?                                                             
i’d heard these stories of guys digging their way out of cells with the          
damnedest things—belt buckles (which i didn’t have)—etc. but i didn’t            
have time to try the count of monte cristo bit. i needed out in a matter of      
months, or my new eyes wouldn’t mean anything.                                   
the door was mainly wood. oak. it was bound with four metal strips.              
one went around it near the top, one near the bottom, right above the gate,      
and there were two which ran from top to bottom, passing along either side       
of the foot-wide grille. the door opened outward, i knew, and the lock was       
to my left. my memories told me the door was about two inches thick, and i       
recalled the approximate position of the lock, which i verified by leaning       
against the door and feeling the tension at that point. i knew that the door     
was also barred, but i could worry about that later. i might be able to raise it 
by sliding the handle of the spoon upward between the door’s edge and the        
jamb.                                                                            
i knelt on my sleeping mat and with the spoon i traced a box about that          
area which contained the lock. i worked until my hand was quite sore—            
maybe a couple of hours. then i ran my fingernail over the surface of the        
wood. i hadn’t scarred it much, but it was a beginning. i switched the spoon     
to my left hand and continued until it, began to ache.                           
i kept hoping that rein would show up. i was sure i could talk him into          
giving me his dagger if i really pressed the matter. he didn’t put in an         
appearance, though, so i just kept grinding away.                                
day after day i worked, until i was perhaps half an inch into the wood.          
each time i’d hear a guard’s footsteps i’d move the pallet back to the far       
wall and lie down on it with my back to the door. when he had passed, i’d        
resume work. then i had to stop for a while, as much as i hated to. even         
though i had wrapped them in cloth torn from my garments, my hands had           
blistered and the blisters had broken, and after a time the raw flesh            
underneath began to bleed. so i took a break to let them heal. i decided to      
devote the time to planning what i’d do after i got out.                         
when i’d worked my way far enough through the door, i’d raise the bar.           
the sound of it falling would probably bring a guard. by then, though, i’d       
be out. a couple of good kicks would break out the piece i was working on        
and the lock could stay right where it was if it wanted to. the door would       
swing open then and i would face the guard. he would be armed and i              
wouldn’t. i’d have to take him.                                                  
he might be overconfident, thinking i couldn’t see. on the other hand,           
he might be a bit afraid, if he recalled how i had entered into amber. either    
way he would die and i would then be armed. i gripped my right biceps            
with my left hand and my fingertips touched. gods! i was emaciated!              
whatever, i was of the blood of amber, and i felt that even in that condition    
i could take any ordinary man. maybe i was kidding myself, but i’d have to       
try it.                                                                          
then if i succeeded, with a blade in my hand, nothing could keep me              
from reaching the pattern. i’d walk it, and when i made it to the center, i      
could transport myself to any shadow world i chose. there i would                
recuperate, and this time i would not rush things. if it took me a century, i’d  
have everything letter-perfect before i moved against amber again. after         
all, i was technically its liege. hadn’t i crowned myself in the presence of     
all, before eric had done the same? i’d make good my claim to the throne!        
if only it weren’t impossible to walk into shadow from amber itself!             
then i wouldn’t have to fool around with the pattern. but my amber is the        
center of all, and you just don’t depart it that easily.                         
after, say, a month my hands had healed and i was developing large               
calluses from my scraping activities. i heard a guard’s footsteps and            
removed myself to the far side of the cell. there was a brief creak and my       
meal was slipped beneath the door. then there were footsteps again, this         
time diminishing in the distance.                                                
i returned to the door. without looking, i knew what was on the tray: a          
chunk of stale bread. a crock of water, and a piece of cheese if i was lucky. i  
positioned the mat, knelt on it and felt at the groove. i was about halfway      
through.                                                                         
then i heard the chuckle.                                                        
it came from behind me.                                                          
i turned, not needing my eyes to tell me that someone else was present.          
there was a man standing near the left wall, giggling.                           
“who is it?” i asked. and my voice sounded strange. i realized then that         
these were the first words i had spoken in a long while.                         
“escape,” he said. “trying to escape.” and he chuckled again.                    
“how did you get in here?”                                                       
“walked,” he replied.                                                            
“from where? how?”                                                               
i struck a match and it hurt my eyes, but i held it.                             
he was a small man. tiny, might be an even better word. he was around            
five feet tall and a hunchback. his hair and beard were as heavy as my own.      
the only distinguishing features in that great mass of fur were his long,        
hook nose and his almost black eyes, now squinted against the light.             
“dworkin!” i said.                                                               
he chuckled again.                                                               
“that’s my name. what’s yours?”                                                  
“don’t you know me, dworkin?” i struck another match and held it                 
near my face. “look hard. forget the beard and the hair. add a hundred           
pounds to my frame. you drew me, in exquisite detail, on several packs of        
playing cards.”                                                                  
“corwin,” he said at last. “i remember you. yes.”                                
“i had thought you were dead.”                                                   
“i’m not, though. see?” and he pirouetted before me. “how is your                
father? have you seen him recently? did he put you here?”                        
“oberon is no more,” i replied. “my brother eric reigns in amber, and            
i’m his prisoner.”                                                               
“then i have seniority,” he told me, “for i am oberon’s prisoner.”               
“oh? none of us knew that dad had locked you up.”                                
i heard him weeping.                                                             
“yes,” he said after a time. “he didn’t trust me.”                               
“why not?”                                                                       
“i told him i’d thought of a way to destroy amber. i described it to him,        
and he locked me in.”                                                            
“that wasn’t very nice.” i said.                                                 
“i know,” he agreed, “but he did give me a pretty apartment and lots of          
things to do research with. only he stopped coming to visit me after a time.     
he used to bring men who showed me splotches of ink and made me tell             
stories about them. that was fun, until i told a story i didn’t like and turned  
the man into a frog. the king was angry when i wouldn’t turn him back,           
and it’s been so long since i’ve seen anybody that i’d even turn him back        
now, if he still wanted me to. once—”                                            
“how did you get here, into my cell?” i asked again.                             
“i told you. i walked.”                                                          
“through the wall?”                                                              
“of course not. through the shadow wall.”                                        
“no man can walk through shadows in amber. there are no shadows                  
in amber.”                                                                       
“well, i cheated,” he admitted.                                                  
“how?”                                                                           
“i designed a new trump and stepped through it, to see what was on               
this side of the wall. oh my!—i just remembered… i can’t get back without        
it. i’ll have to make another. have you got anything to eat? and something       
to draw with? and something to draw on?”                                         
“have a piece of bread,” i said, and handed it to him, “and here’s a             
piece of cheese to go along with it.”                                            
“thank you, corwin.” and he wolfed them down and drank all my                    
water afterward. “now, if you’ll give me a pen and a piece of parchment,         
i’ll be returning to my own rooms. i want to finish a book i was reading.        
it’s been nice talking to you. too bad about eric. i’ll stop back again some     
time and we’ll talk some more. if you see your father, please tell him not to    
he angry with me because i’ll—”                                                  
“i don’t have a pen, or parchment,” i observed.                                  
“goodness,” he said, “that’s hardly civilized.”                                  
“i know. but then, eric isn’t very.”                                             
“well, what have you got? i prefer my own apartment to this place. at            
least, it’s better lighted.”                                                     
“you have dined with me,” i said, “and now i am going to ask you a               
favor. if you will grant me this request, i promise that i will do everything i  
can to make things right between you and dad.”                                   
“what is it that you want?” he asked.                                            
“long have i admired your work,” i said, “and there is something i have          
always desired as a work of your hand. do you recall the lighthouse of           
cabra?”                                                                          
“of course. i’ve been there many times. i know the keeper, jopin. i used         
to play chess with him.”                                                         
“more than anything else i can think of,” i told him, “for most of my            
adult life. i have longed to see one of your magical sketches of that great      
gray tower.”                                                                     
“a very simple subject,” he said, “and rather an appealing one, at that, i       
did some preliminary sketches in the past, but i never got beyond that point.    
other work kept getting in the way. i’ll fetch you one, if you’d like.”          
“no,” i said. “i’d like something more enduring, to keep me company              
here in my cell—to comfort me, and any others who may later occupy this          
place.”                                                                          
“commendable,” he said. “what have you in mind as the medium.”                   
“i have a stylus here,” i told him (the spoon was fairly sharp by then),         
“and i’d like to see it traced upon the far wall, so that i might look at it as i
take my rest.”                                                                   
he was silent a moment, then, “the illumination is quite poor.” he               
remarked.                                                                        
“i have several books of matches,” i replied. “i’ll light them and hold          
them for you. we might even burn some of this straw if we run low.”              
“those are hardly ideal working conditions.                                      
“i know,” i said, “and i apologize for them, great dworkin, but they are         
the best i have to offer. a work of art by your hand would brighten my           
humble existence beyond measure.”                                                
he chuckled again.                                                               
“very well. but you must promise me that you will provide light                  
afterwards, so that i may sketch myself a way back to my own chambers.”          
“agreed.” i said. and i felt in my pocket.                                       
i had three full packages of matches and part of a fourth.                       
i pressed the spoon into his hand and led him to the wall.                       
“do you have the feel of the instrument?” i asked him.                           
“yes, it’s a sharpened spoon, isn’t it?”                                         
“yes. i’ll make a light as soon as you say you are ready. you’ll have to         
sketch rapidly, because my supply of matches is limited. i’ll allot half for     
the lighthouse and the other half for your own business.”                        
“all right,” he said, and i struck a match and he began to trace lines           
upon the moist gray wall.                                                        
first he did an upright rectangle to frame and contain the thing. then           
with several deft strokes, the lighthouse began to appear. it was amazing,       
daft as he was, his skill was intact. i held each match at its barest base, spat 
on my left thumb and forefinger, and when i could hold it no longer in my        
right i took hold of the blackened end and inverted it, letting the match burn   
away completely before i struck another.                                         
when the first book of matches was gone, he had finished the tower and           
was working on the sea and the sky. i encouraged him, i murmured                 
appreciation at every stroke.                                                    
“great, really great,” i said, when it appeared to be almost finished.           
then he made me waste another match while he signed it. i was almost             
through the second book by then.                                                 
“now let’s admire it,” he said.                                                  
“if you want to get back to your own apartments, you’ll have to leave            
the admiring to me.” i told him. “we’re too low on matches to be art critics     
at this point.”                                                                  
he pouted a bit, but moved to the other wall and began sketching as              
soon as i struck a light.                                                        
he sketched a tiny study, a skull on the desk, a globe beside it, walls full     
of books all around.                                                             
“now that’s good.” he said, when i had finished the third pack and was           
starting on the remaining partial pack.                                          
it took him six more to finish up and one to sign it. he gazed at it while       
the eighth match burned—there were only two remaining—then he took a             
step forward and was gone.                                                       
the match was burning my fingertips by then and i dropped it and it              
sizzled when it hit the straw and went out.                                      
i stood there shaking, full of mixed feelings, and then i heard his voice        
and felt his presence at my side. he was back again.                             
“i just thought of something,” he said. “how can you see the picture             
when it’s so dark in here?”                                                      
“oh. i can see in the dark,” i told him. “i’ve lived with it so long that it     
has become my friend.”                                                           
“i see. i just wondered. give me a light so i can go back now.”                  
“very well,” i agreed, considering my second to last match. “but you’d           
better bring your own illumination next time you stop around, i’ll be out of     
matches after this.”                                                             
“all right.” and i struck a light and he considered his drawing, walked          
toward it. and vanished once more.                                               
i turned quickly and considered the lighthouse of cabra before the               
match failed. yes, the power was there. i could feel it.                         
would my final match serve me, though?                                           
no, i didn’t think it would. a longer period of concentration than that          
was required for me to use a trump as a gateway.                                 
what could i burn? the straw was too damp and might not take fire. it            
would be horrible to have the gateway—my road to freedom—right there             
with me and not be able to use it.                                               
i needed a flame that would last awhile.                                         
my sleeping roll! it was a cloth liner stuffed with straw. that straw            
would be drier, and the cloth would burn, too.                                   
i cleared half the floor, down to the bare stone. then i sought the              
sharpened spoon. to use to cut the liner. i cursed then. dworkin had carried     
it off with him.                                                                 
i twisted and tore at the thing.                                                 
finally, it came open and i pulled out the dry straw from the middle. i          
made a little heap of it and i set the liner nearby, to use as extra fuel if i   
needed it. the less smoke the better, though. it would attract attention if a    
guard passed this way. this wasn’t too likely, though, since i had just          
recently been fed, and i got one meal a day.                                     
i struck my last match, then used it to set fire to the cardboard book that      
had contained it. when this got going, i used it on the straw.                   
it almost didn’t take. the straw was damper than i’d thought, even               
though it came from the center of my mat. but finally there was a glow, and      
then a flame. it took two of the other empty matchbooks to achieve this, so i    
was glad i hadn’t thrown them down the john.                                     
i tossed on the third, held the liner in my left hand, and stood and faced       
the drawing.                                                                     
the glow spread up the wall as the flames danced higher, and i                   
concentrated on the tower and recalled it. i thought i heard the cry of a gull.  
i sniffed something like a salt breeze, and the place became more real as i      
stared.                                                                          
i tossed the liner onto the fire. and the flames subsided for a moment,          
then sprang higher. i didn’t remove my eyes from the drawing as i did this.      
the magic was still there, in dworkin’s hand, for soon the lighthouse            
seemed as real to me as my cell. then it seemed the only reality, and the        
cell but a shadow at my back. i heard the splashing of the waves and felt        
something like the afternoon sun upon me.                                        
i stepped forward, but my foot did not descend into the fire.                    
i stood upon the sandy, rock-strewn edge of the small island cabra,              
which held the great gray lighthouse that lit a path for the ships of amber      
by night. a flock of frightened gulls wheeled and screamed about me, and         
my laughter was one with the booming of the surf and the free song of the        
wind. amber lay forty-three miles behind my left shoulder.                       
i had escaped.                                                                   
                                                                    
chapter 10                                                                       
i made my way to the lighthouse and climbed the stone stair that led to the      
door on its western face. it was high, wide, heavy, and watertight. also, it     
was locked. there was a small quay about three hundred yards behind me.          
two boats were moored at it. one was a rowboat and the other was a               
sailboat with a cabin. they swayed gently, and beneath the sun and water         
was mica behind them. i paused for a moment to regard them. it had been          
so long since i had seen anything that for an instant they seemed more than      
real, and i caught a sob within my throat and swallowed it.                      
i turned and knocked on the door.                                                
after what seemed too long a wait, i knocked again.                              
finally, i heard a noise within and the door swung open, creaking on its         
three dark hinges.                                                               
jopin, the keeper, regarded me through bloodshot eyes and i smelled              
whisky upon his breath. he was about five and a half feet tail and so            
stooped that he reminded me somewhat of dworkin. his beard was as long           
as mine, so of course it seemed longer, and it was the color of smoke, save      
for a few yellow stains near his dry-looking lips. his skin was as porous as     
an orange rind and the elements had darkened it to resemble a fine old piece     
of furniture. his dark eyes squinted, focused. as with many people who are       
hard of hearing, he spoke rather loudly.                                         
“who are you? what do you want?” he asked.                                       
if i was that unrecognizable in my emaciated, hairy condition, i decided         
that i might as well maintain my anonymity.                                      
“i am a traveler from the south and i was shipwrecked recently,” i said.         
“i clung to a piece of wood for many days and was finally washed ashore          
here. i slept on the beach all morning. it was only recently that i recovered    
sufficient strength to walk to your lighthouse.”                                 
he moved forward and took my arm. he threw his other arm around my               
shoulders.                                                                       
“come in, come in then,” he said. “lean on me. take it easy. come this           
way.”                                                                            
he led me to his quarters, which were extraordinarily messy, being               
strewn with many old books, charts, maps, and pieces of nautical                 
equipment. he wasn’t any too steady himself, so i didn’t lean too hard, just     
enough to maintain the impression of weakness i had tried to convey as i’d       
leaned against his doorframe.                                                    
he led me to a daybed, suggested i lie down, and left to secure the door         
and fetch me something to eat.                                                   
i removed my boots, but my feet were so filthy that i put them back on           
again. if i’d been drifting about very long, i wouldn’t be dirty. i didn’t want  
to give away my story, so i drew a blanket that was there over me and            
leaned hack, really resting.                                                     
jopin returned shortly with a pitcher of water, a pitcher of beer, a great       
slice of beef, and half a loaf of bread upon a square wooden tray. he swept      
clear the top of a small table, which he then kicked into a position beside      
the couch. then he set the tray down on it and bade me eat and drink.            
i did. i stuffed myself. i glutted myself. i ate everything in sight. i          
emptied both pitchers.                                                           
then i felt tremendously tired. jopin nodded when he saw it come over            
me, and he told me to go to sleep. before i knew it, i had.                      
when i awakened, it was night time and i felt considerably better than i had     
in many weeks. i got to my feet and retraced my earlier route and departed       
the building. it was chilly out there, but the sky was crystal clear and there   
seemed to be a million stars. the lens at the top of the tower blazed at my      
back, then went dark, blazed, then went dark. the water was cold, but i just     
had to cleanse myself. i bathed and washed my clothing and wrung it out. i       
must have spent an hour doing that. then i went back to the lighthouse,          
hung my clothes over the back of an old chair to dry out, crawled beneath        
the blanket, slept again.                                                        
in the morning, when i awoke, jopin was already up. he prepared me a             
hearty breakfast, and i treated it the same way as i had the dinner of the       
previous evening. then i borrowed a razor, a mirror, and a pair of scissors      
and gave myself a shave and a sort of haircut. i bathed again afterward, and     
when i donned my salty, stiff, clean garments i felt almost human again.         
jopin stared at me when i returned from the sea and said, “you look              
kinda familiar, fella,” and i shrugged.                                          
“now tell me about your wreck.”                                                  
so i did. out of whole cloth. what a disaster i detailed! down to the            
snapping of the mainmast, yet.                                                   
he patted me on the shoulder and poured me a drink. he lit the cigar he          
had given me.                                                                    
“you just rest easy here,” he told me. “i’ll take you ashore any time you        
like, or i’ll signal you a passing ship if you see one you recognize.”           
i took him up on his offered hospitality. it was too much of a lifesaver         
not to. i ate his food and drank his drinks and let him give me a clean shirt    
which was too big for him. it had belonged to a friend of his who’d              
drowned at sea.                                                                  
i stayed with him for three months, as i recovered my strength. i helped         
him around the place—tending the light on nights when he felt like getting       
smashed, and cleaning up all the rooms in the house—even to the extent of        
painting two of them and replacing five cracked windowpanes—and                  
watching the sea with him on stormy nights.                                      
he was apolitical, i learned. he didn’t care who reigned in amber. so            
far as he was concerned, the whole bloody crew of us were rotten. so long        
as he could tend his lighthouse and eat and drink of good food and brew,         
and consider his nautical charts in peace, he didn’t give half a damn what       
happened ashore. i came to be rather fond of him, and since i knew               
something of old charts and maps also, we spent many a good evening              
correcting a few. i had sailed far into the north many years ago, and i gave     
him a new chart based on my recollections of the voyage. this seemed to          
please him immensely, as did my description of those waters.                     
“corey” (that was how i’d named myself), “i’d like to sail with you one          
day,” he said. “i hadn’t realized you were skipper of your own vessel one        
time.”                                                                           
“who knows?” i told him. “you were once a captain yourself, weren’t              
you?”                                                                            
“how’d you know?” he asked.                                                      
actually, i’d remembered, but i gestured about me in reply.                      
“all these things you’ve collected,” i said, “and your fondness for the          
charts, also, you bear yourself like a man who once held a command.”             
he smiled.                                                                       
“yes,” he told me, “that’s true. i had a command for over a hundred              
years. that seems long ago… let’s have another drink.”                           
i sipped mine and sort of put it aside. i must have gained over forty            
pounds in the months i had spent with him. any day now, i was expecting          
him to recognize me as a member of the family. maybe he would turn me in         
to eric if he did—and maybe not. now that we’d established this much of          
camaraderie, i had a feeling that he might not do it. i didn’t want to take the  
chance and find out.                                                             
sometimes as i sat tending the light i wondered, “how long should i              
stay here?”                                                                      
not too much longer, i decided, adding a drop of grease to a swivel              
bearing. not much longer at all. the time was drawing near when i should         
take to the road and walk among shadows once again.                              
then one day i felt the pressure, gentle and questing at first. i couldn’t tell  
for sure who it was.                                                             
i immediately stood stock still, closed my eyes and made my mind go              
blank. it was about five minutes before the questing presence withdrew.          
i paced then and wondered, and i smiled when i realized the shortness            
of my course. unconsciously, i had been pacing out the dimensions of my          
cell back in amber.                                                              
someone had just tried to reach me, via my trump. was it eric? had he            
finally become aware of my absence and decided to try locating me in this        
manner? i wasn’t sure. i felt that he might fear mental contact with me          
again. julian, then? or gerard? caine? whoever it had been, i had closed         
him out completely, i knew that. and i would refuse such contact with any        
of my family. i might be missing some important news or a helpful call, but      
i couldn’t afford to take the chance. the attempted contact and my blocking      
efforts left me with a chill. i shuddered. i thought about the thing all the rest
of the day and decided that the time had come for me to move on. it              
wouldn’t do for me to remain this close to amber while i was so                  
vulnerable. i had recovered sufficiently to make my way among shadows,           
to seek for the place where i had to go if amber were ever to be mine. i had     
been lulled into something close to peace by old join’s ministrations. it        
would be a pain to leave him, for in the months of our association i had         
come to like the old guy. so that evening, after we’d finished a game of         
chess, i told him of my plans to depart.                                         
he poured us two drinks then raised his and said, “good luck to you,             
corwin. i hope to see you again one day.”                                        
i didn’t question the fact that he had called me by my proper name, and          
he smiled as he realized that i hadn’t let it slip by.                           
“you’ve been all right, jopin,” i told him. “if i should succeed in what         
i’m about to try, i won’t forget what you did for me.”                           
he shook his head.                                                               
“i don’t want anything,” he said. “i’m happy right where i am, doing             
exactly what i’m doing. i enjoy running this damned tower. it’s my whole         
life. if you should succeed in whatever you’re about—no, don’t tell me           
about it, please! i don’t want to know!—i’ll be hoping you’ll stop around        
for a game of chess sometime.”                                                   
“i will,” i promised.                                                            
“you can take the butterfly in the morning, if you’d like.”                      
“thanks.”                                                                        
the butterfly was his sailboat.                                                  
“before you go,” he said, “i suggest you take my spyglass, climb the             
tower, and look back on the vale of garnath.”                                    
“what’s there to see?”                                                           
he shrugged.                                                                     
“you’ll have to make up your own mind about that”                                
i nodded.                                                                        
“okay, i will.”                                                                  
we then proceeded to get pleasantly high and turned in for the night. i’d        
miss old jopin. with the exception of rein, he was the only friend i’d found     
since my return. i wondered vaguely about the valley which had been a            
sheet of flame the last time i had crossed it. what could it be that was so      
unusual about it now, these four years later?                                    
troubled by dreams of werewolves and sabbats, i slept, and the full              
moon rose above the world.                                                       
at the crack of dawn i did the same. jopin was still sleeping, which was         
good, because i don’t really like to say good-by, and i had a funny feeling      
that i would never see him again.                                                
i climbed the tower to the room that housed the big light, spyglass at my        
side. i moved to the window facing the shore and focused on the valley.          
there was a mist hanging above the wood. it was a cold, gray, wet-               
looking thing that clung to the tops of the small, gnarly trees. the trees       
were dark, and their branches twisted together like the fingers of wrestling     
hands. dark things darted among them, and from the patterns of their fight i     
knew they were not birds. bats. probably. there was something evil present       
in that great wood, i knew, and then i recognized it. it was myself.             
i had done this thing with my curse. i had transformed the peaceful              
valley of garnath into what it now represented: it was a symbol of my hate       
for eric and for all those others who had stood by and let him get away with     
his power grab, let him blind me. i didn’t like the looks of that forest, and as 
i stared at it i realized how my hate had objectified itself. i knew it because  
it was a part of me.                                                             
i had created a new entranceway into the real world. garnath was now a           
pathway through shadows. shadows dark and grim. only the dangerous,              
the malicious might walk that pathway. this was the source of the things         
rein had mentioned, the things that troubled eric. good—in a way—if they         
kept him occupied. but as i swung the glass, i couldn’t escape the feeling       
that i had done a very bad thing indeed. at the time, i’d had no idea that i’d   
ever see the light of day’s bright skies again. now that i did, i realized that  
i’d unleashed a thing that would take an awful lot of undoing. even now,         
strange shapes seemed to move within that place. i had done a thing which        
had never been done before, not during the whole of oberon’s reign: i had        
opened a new way to amber. and i had opened it only to the worst. a day          
would come when the liege of amber—whoever he might be—would be                  
faced with the problem of closing that dreadful way. i knew this as i stared,    
realizing the thing to be a product of my own pain, anger, and hate. if i won    
out in amber one day, i might have to cope with my own handiwork, which          
is always a devilish thing to attempt. i lowered the glass and sighed.           
so be it, i decided. in the meantime, it would give eric something to            
have insomnia over.                                                              
i grabbed a quick bite to eat, outfitted the butterfly as rapidly as i could,    
hoisted some canvas, cast off, and set sail. jopin was usually up by that        
hour, but maybe he didn’t like good-byes either.                                 
i headed her out to sea, knowing where i was going but not real certain          
how to get there. i’d be sailing through shadow and strange waters, but it       
would be better than the overland route, what with my handiwork abroad in        
the realm.                                                                       
i had set sail for a land near as sparkling as amber itself, an almost           
immortal place, a place that did not really exist, not any longer. it was a      
place which had vanished into chaos ages ago, but of which a shadow must         
somewhere survive. all i had to do was find it, recognize it, and make it        
mine once again, as it had been in days long gone by. then, with my own          
forces to back me up, i would do another thing amber had never known. i          
didn’t know how yet, but i promised myself that guns would blaze within          
the immortal city on the day of my return.                                       
as i sailed into shadow, a white bird of my desire came and sat upon             
my right shoulder, and i wrote a note and tied it to its leg and sent it on its  
way. the note said, “i am coming,” and it was signed by me.                      
i would never rest until i held vengeance and the throne within my               
hand, and good night sweet prince to anybody who stood between me and            
these things.                                                                    
the sun hung low on my left and the winds bellied the sails and                  
propelled me onward. i cursed once and then laughed.                             
i was free and i was running. but i had made it this far. i now had the          
chance i’d wanted all along.                                                     
a black bird of my desire came and sat on my left shoulder, and i wrote          
a note and tied it to its leg and sent it off into the west.                     
it said, “eric—i’ll be back,” and it was signed: “corwin, lord of                
amber.”                                                                          
a demon wind propelled me east of the sun.                                       
