the guns of avalon                                                                
the first amber pentology - corwin’s story: book 2                                
                                                                     
chapter 1                                                                         
i stood there on the beach and said, “good-by, butterfly,” and the ship           
slowly turned, then headed out toward deep water. it would make it back           
into port at the lighthouse of cabra, i knew, for that place lay near to          
shadow.                                                                           
turning away, i regarded the black line of trees near at hand, knowing            
that a long walk lay ahead of me. i moved in that direction, making the           
necessary adjustments as i advanced. a pre-dawn chill lay upon the silent         
forest, and this was good.                                                        
i was perhaps fifty pounds underweight and still occasionally                     
experienced double vision, but i was improving. i had escaped the                 
dungeons of amber and recuperated somewhat, with the assistance of mad            
dworkin and drunken jopin, in that order. now i had to find me a place, a         
place resembling another place—one which no longer existed. i located the         
path. i took it.                                                                  
after a time, i stopped at a hollow tree that had to be there. i reached          
inside and drew forth my silvered blade and strapped it to my waist. it           
mattered not that it had been somewhere in amber. it was here now, for the        
wood that i walked was in shadow.                                                 
i continued for several hours, the unseen sun somewhere behind my left            
shoulder. then i rested awhile, then moved on. it was good to see the leaves      
and the rocks and the dead tree trunks, the live ones, the grass, the dark        
earth. it was good to smell all the little smells of life, and to hear its        
buzzing/humming/chirping sounds. god! how i treasured my eyes! having             
them back again after nearly four years of blackness was a thing for which i      
lacked words. and to be walking free…                                             
i went on, my tattered cloak flapping in the morning breeze. i must have          
looked over fifty years old, my face creased, my form sparse, lean. who           
would have known me for what i was?                                               
as i walked, walked in shadow, moved toward a place, i did not reach              
that place. it must be that i had grown somewhat soft. here is what               
happened—                                                                         
i came upon seven men by the side of the road, and six of them were               
dead, lying in various stages of red dismemberment. the seventh was in a          
semi-reclined position, his back against the mossy bole of an ancient oak.        
he held his blade across his lap and there was a large wet wound in his right     
side, from which the blood still flowed. he wore no armor, though some of         
the others did. his gray eyes were open, though glassy. his knuckles were         
skinned and his breathing was slow. from beneath shaggy brows, he                 
watched the crows eat out the eyes of the dead. he did not seem to see me.        
i raised my cowl and lowered my head to hide my face. i moved nearer.             
i knew him, or someone very like him, once. his blade twitched and the            
point rose as i advanced.                                                         
“i’m a friend,” i said. “would you like a drink of water?” he hesitated a         
moment, then nodded.                                                              
“yes.” i opened my canteen and passed it to him. he drank and                     
coughed, drank some more.                                                         
“sir, i thank you,” he said as he passed it back. “i only regret it were not      
stronger. damn this cut!”                                                         
“i’ve some of that, too. if you’re sure you can handle it.”                       
he held out his hand and i unstoppered a small flask and gave it to him.          
he must have coughed for twenty seconds after a slug of that stuff jopin          
drinks.                                                                           
then the left side of his mouth smiled and he winked lightly.                     
“much better,” he said. “mind if i pour a drop of this onto my side? i            
hate to waste good whisky, but—”                                                  
“use it all, if you have to. on second thought, though, your hand looks           
shaky. maybe i’d better do the pouring.”                                          
he nodded, and i opened his leather jacket and with my dagger cut                 
away at his shirt until i had exposed the wound. it was nasty-looking, deep,      
running from front to back a couple inches above the top of his hip. he had       
other, less serious gashes on his arms, chest, and shoulders.                     
the blood kept oozing from the big one, and i blotted it a bit and wiped          
it clean with my kerchief.                                                        
“okay,” i said, “clench your teeth and look away.” and i poured.                  
his entire body jerked, one great spasm, and then he settled down to              
shivering. but he did not cry out. i had not thought he would. i folded the       
kerchief and pressed it in place on the wound. i tied it there, with a long       
strip i had torn from the bottom of my cloak. “want another drink?” i asked       
him.                                                                              
“of water,” he said. “then i fear i must sleep.” he drank, then his head          
leaned forward until his chin was resting upon his breast. he slept, and i        
made him a pillow and covered him over with dead men’s cloaks.                    
then i sat there at his side and watched the pretty black birds.                  
he had not recognized me. but then, who would? had i revealed myself              
to him, he might possibly have known me. we had never really met, i               
guess, this wounded man and i. but in a peculiar sense, we were                   
acquainted.                                                                       
i was walking in shadow, seeking a place, a very special place. it had            
been destroyed once, but i had the power to re-create it, for amber casts an      
infinity of shadows. a child of amber may walk among them, and such was           
my heritage. you may call them parallel worlds if you wish, alternate             
universes if you would, the products of a deranged mind if you care to. i         
call them shadows, as do all who possess the power to walk among them.            
we select a possibility and we walk until we reach it. so, in a sense, we         
create it. let’s leave it at that for now.                                        
i had sailed, had begun this walk toward avalon.                                  
centuries before, i had lived there. it is a long, complicated, proud and         
painful story, and i may go into it later on, if i live to finish much more of    
this telling.                                                                     
i was drawing nearer to my avalon when i came upon the wounded                    
knight and the six dead men. had i chosen to walk on by, i could have             
reached a place where the six men lay dead and the knight stood                   
unwounded—or a place where he lay dead and they stood laughing. some              
would say it did not really matter, since all these things are possibilities, and 
therefore all of them exist somewhere in shadow.                                  
any of my brothers and sisters—with the possible exceptions of gerard             
and benedict—would not even have given a second glance. i have become             
somewhat chickenhearted, however. i was not always that way, but perhaps          
the shadow earth, where i spent so many years, mellowed me a bit, and             
maybe my hitch in the dungeons of amber reminded me somewhat of the               
quality of human suffering. i do not know. i only know that i could not pass      
by the hurt i saw on the form of someone much like someone who had once           
been a friend. if i were to speak my name in this man’s ear, i might hear         
myself reviled, i would certainly hear a tale of woe.                             
so, all right. i would pay this much of the price: i would get him back           
on his feet, then i would cut out. no harm done, and perhaps some small           
good within this other.                                                           
i sat there, watching him, and after several hours, he awakened.                  
“hello,” i said, unstoppering my canteen. “have another drink?”                   
“thank you.” he extended a hand.                                                  
i watched him drink, and when he handed it back he said, “excuse me               
for not introducing myself. i was not in good manner…”                            
“i know you,” i said. “call me corey.”                                            
he looked as if he were about to say, “corey of what?” but thought                
better of it and nodded.                                                          
“very well. sir corey,” he demoted me. “i wish to thank you.”                     
“i am thanked by the fact that yon are looking better,” i told him. “want         
something to eat?”                                                                
“yes, please.”                                                                    
“i have some dried meat here and some bread that could be fresher,” i             
said. “also a big hunk of cheese. eat all you want.” i passed it to him and       
he did.                                                                           
“what of yourself, sir corey?” he inquired.                                       
“i’ve already eaten, while you were asleep.” i looked about me,                   
significantly. he smiled.                                                         
“…and you knocked off all six of them by yourself?” i said. he                    
nodded.                                                                           
“good show. what am i going to do with you now?”                                  
he tried to see my face, failed. “i do not understand,” he said.                  
“where are you headed?”                                                           
“i have friends,” he said, “some five leagues to the north. i was going in        
that direction when this thing happened. and i doubt very much that any           
man, or the devil himself, could bear me on his back for one league. ’an i        
could stand, sir corey, you’d a better idea as to my size.”                       
i rose, drew my blade, and felled a sapling—about two inches in                   
diameter—with one cut. then i stripped it and hacked it to the proper             
length.                                                                           
i did it again, and with the belts and cloaks of dead men i rigged a              
stretcher.                                                                        
he watched until i was finished, then commented:                                  
“you swing a deadly blade. sir corey—and a silver one, it would                   
seem…”                                                                            
“are you up to some traveling?” i asked him. five leagues is roughly              
fifteen miles.                                                                    
“what of the dead?” he inquired.                                                  
“you want to maybe give them a decent christian burial?” i said.                  
“screw them! nature takes care of its own. let’s get out of here. they stink      
already.”                                                                         
“i’d like at least to see them covered over. they fought well.”                   
i sighed.                                                                         
“all right, if it will help yon to sleep nights. i haven’t a spade, so i’ll       
build them a cairn. it’s going to be a common burial, though.”                    
“good enough,” he said.                                                           
i laid the six bodies out, side by side. i heard him mumbling something,          
which i guessed to be a prayer for the dead.                                      
i ringed them around with stones. there were plenty of stones in the              
vicinity, so i worked quickly, choosing the largest so that things would go       
faster.                                                                           
that is where i made a mistake. one of them must have weighed around              
four hundred pounds, and i did not roll it. i hefted it and set it in place.      
i heard a sharp intake of breath from his direction, and i realized that he       
had noted this. i cursed then:                                                    
“damn near ruptured myself on that one!” i said, and i selected smaller           
stones after that.                                                                
when i had finished, i said, “all right. are you ready to move?”                  
“yes.”                                                                            
i raised him in my arms and set him on the stretcher. he clenched his             
teeth as i did so.                                                                
“where do we go?” i asked.                                                        
he gestured.                                                                      
“head back to the trail. follow it to the left until it forks. then go right      
at that place. how do you propose to…?”                                           
i scooped the stretcher up in my arms, holding him as you would a                 
baby, cradle and all. then i turned and walked back to the trail, carrying        
him.                                                                              
“corey?” he said.                                                                 
“yes?”                                                                            
“you are one of the strongest men i have ever met—and it seems i                  
should know you.”                                                                 
i did not answer him immediately. then i said, “i try to keep in good             
condition. clean living and all.”                                                 
“…and your voice sounds rather familiar.”                                         
he was staring upward, still trying to see my face. i decided to get off          
the subject fast.                                                                 
“who are these friends of yours i am taking you to?”                              
“we are headed for the keep of ganelon.”                                          
“that ratfink!” i said, almost dropping him.                                      
“while i do not understand the word you have used, i take it to be a              
term of opprobrium,” he said, “from the tone of your voice. if such is the        
case, i must be his defender in—”                                                 
“hold on,” i said. “i’ve a feeling we’re talking about two different guys         
with the same name. sorry.” through the stretcher, i felt a certain tension       
go out of him.                                                                    
“that is doubtless the case,” he said.                                            
so i carried him until we reached the trail, and there i turned to the left.      
he dropped off to sleep again, and i made better time after that, taking          
the fork he had told me about and sprinting while he snored. i began              
wondering about the six fellows who had tried to do him in and almost             
succeeded. i hoped that they did not have any friends beating about the           
bushes.                                                                           
i slowed my pace back to a walk when his breathing changed.                       
“i was asleep,” he said.                                                          
“…and snoring,” i added.                                                          
“how far have you borne me?”                                                      
“around two leagues, i’d say.”                                                    
“and you are not tired?”                                                          
“some,” i said, “but not enough to need rest just yet.”                           
“mon dieu!” he said. “i am pleased never to have had you for an                   
enemy. are you certain you are not the devil?”                                    
“yeah, sure,” i said. “don’t you smell the brimstone? and my right                
hoof is killing me.”                                                              
he actually sniffed a couple times before he chuckled, which hurt my              
feelings a bit.                                                                   
actually, we had traveled over four leagues, as i reckoned it. i was              
hoping he would sleep again and not be too concerned about distances. my          
arms were beginning to ache.                                                      
“who were those six men you slew?” i asked him.                                   
“wardens of the circle,” he replied, “and they were no longer men, but            
men possessed. now pray to god, sir corey, that their souls be at peace.”         
“wardens of the circle?” i asked. “what circle?”                                  
“the dark circle—the place of iniquity and loathsome beasts…” he                  
took a deep breath. “the source of the illness that lies upon the land.”          
“this land doesn’t look especially ill to me,” i said.                            
“we are far from that place, and the realm of ganelon is still too strong         
for the invaders. but the circle widens. i feel that the last battle will be      
fought here.”                                                                     
“you have aroused my curiosity as to this thing.”                                 
“sir corey, if you know not of it ‘twere better you forgot it, skirted the        
circle, and went your way. though i should dearly love to fight by your           
side, this is not your fight—and who can tell the outcome?”                       
the trail began winding upward. then, through a break in the trees, i             
saw a distant thing that made me pause and caused me to recall another,           
similar place.                                                                    
“what…?” asked my charge, turning. then, “why, you moved much                     
more quickly than i had guessed. that is our destination, the keep of             
ganelon.”                                                                         
i thought then about a ganelon. i did not want to, but i did. he had been         
a traitorous assassin and i had exiled him from avalon centuries before. i        
had actually cast him through shadow into another time and place, as my           
brother eric had later done to me. i hoped it was not to this place that i had    
sent him. while not very likely, it was possible. though he was a mortal          
man with his allotted span, and i had exiled him from that place perhaps six      
hundred years ago, it was possible that it was only a few years past in terms     
of this world. time, too, is a function of shadow, and even dworkin did not       
know all of its ins and outs. or perhaps he did. maybe that is what drove         
him mad. the most difficult thing about time, i have learned, is doing it. in     
any case, i felt that this could not be my old enemy and former trusted aide,     
for he would certainly not be resisting any wave of iniquity that was             
sweeping across the land. he would be right in there pitching for the             
loathsome beasts, i felt sure.                                                    
a thing that caused me difficulty was the man that i carried. his                 
counterpart had been alive in avalon at the time of the exiling, meaning that     
the time lag could be just about right.                                           
i did not care to encounter the ganelon i had known and be recognized             
by him. he knew nothing of shadow. he would only know that i had                  
worked some dark magic on him, as an alternative to killing him, and while        
he had survived that alternative it might have been the rougher of the two.       
but the man in my arms needed a place of rest and shelter, so i trudged           
forward.                                                                          
i wondered, though…                                                               
there did seem to be something about me that lent itself to recognition           
by this man. if there were some memories of a shadow of myself in this            
place that was like yet not like avalon, what form did they take? how             
would they condition a reception of the actual me should i be discovered?         
the sun was beginning to sink. a cool breeze began, hinting of a chilly           
night to come. my ward was snoring once more, so i decided to sprint most         
of the remaining distance. i did not like the feeling that this forest after dark 
might become a place crawling with unclean denizens of some damned                
circle that i knew nothing about, but who seemed to be on the make when           
it came to this particular piece of real estate.                                  
so i ran through lengthening shadows, dismissing rising notions of                
pursuit, ambush, surveillance, until i could do so no longer. they had            
achieved the strength of a premonition, and then i heard the noises at my         
back: a soft pat-pat-pat, as of footfalls.                                        
i set the stretcher down, and i drew my blade as i turned.                        
there were two of them, cats.                                                     
their markings were precisely those of siamese cats, only these were              
the size of tigers. their eyes were of a solid, sun-bright yellow, pupilless.     
they seated themselves on their haunches as i turned, and they stared at me       
and did not blink.                                                                
they were about thirty paces away. i stood sideways between them and              
the stretcher, my blade raised.                                                   
then the one to the left opened its mouth. i did not know whether to              
expect a purr or a roar. instead, it spoke. it said, “man, most mortal.” the      
voice was not human-sounding. it was too high-pitched.                            
“yet still it lives,” said the second, sounding much like the first.              
“slay it here,” said the first.                                                   
“what of the one who guards it with the blade i like not at all?”                 
“mortal man?”                                                                     
“come find out,” i said, softly.                                                  
“it is thin, and perhaps it is old.”                                              
“yet it bore the other from the cairn to this place, rapidly and without          
rest. let us flank it.”                                                           
i sprang forward as they moved, and the one to my right leaped toward             
me.                                                                               
my blade split its skull and continued on into the shoulder. as i turned,         
yanking it free, the other swept past me, heading toward the stretcher. i         
swung wildly.                                                                     
my blade fell upon its back and passed completely through its body. it            
emitted a shriek that grated like chalk on a blackboard as it fell in two         
pieces and began to bum. the other was burning also.                              
but the one i had halved was not yet dead. its head turned toward me              
and those blazing eyes met my own and held them.                                  
“i die the final death,” it said, “and so i know you, opener. why do you          
slay us?” and then the flames consumed its head.                                  
i turned, cleaned my blade and sheathed it, picked up the stretcher,              
ignored all questions, and continued on.                                          
a small knowledge had begun within me, as to what the thing was, what             
it had meant.                                                                     
and i still sometimes see that burning cat head in dreams, and then i             
awaken, wet and shivering, and the night seems darker, and filled with            
shapes i cannot define.                                                           
the keep of ganelon had a moat about it, and a drawbridge, which was              
raised. there was a tower at each of the four comers where its high walls         
met. from within those walls many other towers reached even higher,               
tickling the bellies of low, dark clouds, occluding the early stars, casting      
shadows of jet down the high hill the place occupied. several of the towers       
were already lighted, and the wind bore me the faint sound of voices.             
i stood before the drawbridge, lowered my charge to the ground, cupped            
my hands about my mouth, and called out:                                          
“hola! ganelon! two travelers are stranded in the night!”                         
i heard the clink of metal on stone. i felt that i was being studied from         
somewhere above. i squinted upward, but my eyes were still far from               
normal.                                                                           
“who is there?” the voice came down, big and booming.                             
“lance, who is wounded, and i, corey of cabra, who bore him here.”                
i waited as he called this information to another sentry, and i heard             
more voices raised as the message was passed along the line.                      
after a pause of several minutes, a reply came back in the same manner.           
then the guard called down:                                                       
“stay clear! we’re going to lower the drawbridge! you may enter!”                 
the creaking began as he spoke, and in a brief time the thing banged to           
earth on our side of the moat. i raised my charge once more and walked            
across it.                                                                        
thus did i bear sir lancelot du lac to the keep of ganelon, whom i                
trusted like a brother. that is to say, not at all.                               
there was a rush of people about me, and i found myself ringed by armed           
men. there was no hostility present, however, only concern. i had entered a       
large, cobbled courtyard, lit by torches and filled with bedrolls. i could        
smell sweat, smoke, horses, and the odors of cooking. a small army was            
bivouacked there.                                                                 
many had approached me and stood staring and murmuring, but then                  
there came up two who were fully arrayed, as for battle, and one of them          
touched my shoulder.                                                              
“come this way,” he said.                                                         
i followed and they flanked me. the ring of people parted as we passed.           
the drawbridge was already creaking back into place. we moved toward              
the main complex of dark stone.                                                   
inside, we walked along a hallway and passed what appeared to be a                
reception chamber. then we came upon a stairway. the man to my right              
indicated that i should mount it. on the second floor, we stopped before a        
heavy wooden door and the guard knocked upon it.                                  
“come in,” called out a voice which unfortunately seemed very                     
familiar. we entered.                                                             
he sat at a heavy wooden table near a wide window overlooking the                 
courtyard. he wore a brown leather jacket over a black shirt, and his             
trousers were also black. they were bloused over the tops of his dark boots.      
he had about his waist a wide belt which held a hoof-hilted dagger. a short       
sword lay on the table before him. his hair and beard were red, with a            
sprinkling of white. his eyes were dark as ebony.                                 
he looked at me, then turned his attention to a pair of guards who                
entered with the stretcher.                                                       
“put him on my bed,” he said. then, “roderick, tend to him.”                      
his physician, roderick, was an old guy who didn’t look as if he would            
do much harm, which relieved me somewhat. i had not fetched lance all             
that distance to have him bled.                                                   
then ganelon turned to me once more. “where did you find him?” he                 
asked.                                                                            
“five leagues to the south of here.”                                              
“who are you?”                                                                    
“they call me corey,” i said.                                                     
he studied me too closely, and his worm-like lips twitched toward a               
smile beneath his mustache. “what is your part in this thing?” he asked.          
“i don’t know what you mean,” i said.                                             
i had let my shoulders sag a bit. i spoke slowly, softly, and with a slight       
falter. my beard was longer than his, and lightened by dust. i imagined i         
looked like an older man. his attitude on appraisal tended to indicate that he    
thought i was.                                                                    
“i am asking you why you helped him,” he said.                                    
“brotherhood of man, and all that,” i replied.                                    
“you are a foreigner?”                                                            
i nodded.                                                                         
“well, you are welcome here for so long as you wish to stay.”                     
“thanks. i will probably move on tomorrow.”                                       
“now join me in a glass of wine and tell me of the circumstances under            
which you found him.”                                                             
so i did.                                                                         
ganelon let me speak without interrupting, and those, piercing eyes of            
his were on me all the while. while i had always felt laceration by means of      
the eyeballs to be a trite expression, it did not feel so that night. he stabbed  
at me with them. i wondered what he knew and what he was guessing                 
concerning me.                                                                    
then fatigue sprang and seized me by the scruff of the neck. the                  
exertion, the wine, the warm room—all of these worked together, and               
suddenly it was as if i were standing off in the comer somewhere and              
listening to myself, watching myself, feeling dissociated. while i was            
capable of great exertion in short bursts, i realized that i was still very low   
when it came to stamina. i also noticed that my hand was trembling.               
“i’m sorry,” i heard myself saying. “the day’s labors are beginning to            
get to me…”                                                                       
“of course,” said ganelon. “i will talk with you more on the morrow.              
sleep now. sleep well.”                                                           
then he called in one of the guards and ordered him to conduct me to a            
chamber. i must have staggered on the way, because i remember the guard’s         
hand on my elbow, steering me.                                                    
that night i slept the sleep of the dead. it was a big, black thing, about        
fourteen hours long.                                                              
in the morning, i ached all over.                                                 
i bathed myself. there was a basin on the high dresser, and soap and a            
washcloth someone had thoughtfully set beside it.                                 
my throat felt packed with sawdust and my eyes were full of fuzz. i sat           
down and assessed myself.                                                         
there had been a day when i could have carried lance the entire                   
distance without going to pieces afterward. there had been a day when i           
had fought my way up the face of kolvir and into the heart of amber itself.       
those days were gone. i suddenly felt like the wreck i must have                  
looked.                                                                           
something would have to be done.                                                  
i had been putting on weight and picking up strength slowly. the                  
process would have to be accelerated.                                             
a week or two of clean living and violent exercise could help a lot, i            
decided. ganelon had not given any real indication of having recognized           
me. all right. i would take advantage of the hospitality he had offered.          
with that resolve, i sought out the kitchen and conned a hearty                   
breakfast. well, it was really around lunchtime, but let’s call things by their   
proper names. i had a strong desire for a smoke and felt a certain perverse       
joy in the fact that i was out of tobacco. the fates were conspiring to keep      
me true to myself.                                                                
i strolled out into the courtyard and a brisk, bright day. for a long while,      
i watched the men who were quartered there as they went through their             
training regime.                                                                  
there were bowmen off at the far end, thwanging away at targets                   
fastened to bales of hay. i noted that they employed thumb rings and an           
oriental grip on the bowstring, rather than the three-fingered technique with     
which i was more comfortable. it made me wonder a bit about this shadow.          
the swordsmen used both the edges and points of their weapons, and there          
was a variety of blades and fencing techniques in evidence. i tried to            
estimate, and guessed there were perhaps eight hundred of them about—and          
i had no idea as to how many of them there might be out of sight. their           
complexions, their hair, their eyes, varied from pale to quite dark. i heard      
many strange accents above the thwanging and the clanging, though most            
spoke the language of avalon, which is of the tongue of amber.                    
as i stood watching, one swordsman raised his hand, lowered his blade,            
mopped his brow, and stepped back. his opponent did not seem especially           
winded. this was my chance for some of the exercise i was seeking.                
i moved forward, smiled, and said, “i’m corey of cabra. i was                     
watching you.”                                                                    
i turned my attention to the big, dark man who was grinning at his                
resting buddy.                                                                    
“mind if i practice with you while your friend rests?” i asked him.               
he kept grinning and pointed at his mouth and his ear. i tried several            
other languages, but none of them worked. so i pointed at the blade and at        
him and back to myself until he got the idea. his opponent seemed to think        
it was a good one, as the smaller fellow offered me his blade.                    
i took it into my hands. it was shorter and a lot heavier than                    
grayswandir. (that is the name of my blade, which i know i have not               
mentioned up until now. it is a story in itself, and i may or may not go into     
it before you learn what brought me to this final pass. but should you hear       
me refer to it by name again, you will know what i am talking about.) i           
swung my blade a few times to test it, removed my cloak, tossed it off to the     
side, and struck an en garde.                                                     
the big fellow attacked. i parried and attacked. he parried and riposted.         
i parried the riposte, feinted, and attacked. et cetera. after five minutes, i    
knew that he was good. and i knew that i was better. he stopped me twice          
so that i could teach him a maneuver i had used. he learned both very             
quickly. after fifteen minutes, though, his grin widened. i guess that was        
around the point where he broke down most opponents by virtue of sheer            
staying power, if they were good enough to resist his attacks up until then.      
he had stamina, i’ll say that. after twenty minutes, a puzzled look came          
onto his face. i just didn’t look as if i could stand up that long. but then,     
what can any man really know of that which lies within a scion of amber?          
after twenty-five minutes, he was sheathed in sweat, but he continued             
on. my brother random looks and acts, on occasion, like an asthmatic,             
teen-age hood—but once we had fenced together for over twenty-six hours,          
to see who would call it quits. (if you’re curious, it was me. i had had a date   
lined up for the next day and had wanted to arrive in reasonably good             
condition.) we could have gone on. while i was not up to a performance            
like that just then, i knew that i could outlast the man i faced. after all, he   
was only human.                                                                   
after about half an hour, when he was breathing heavily and slowing               
down on his counterstrokes and i knew that in a few minutes he might              
guess that i was pulling mine, i raised my hand and lowered my blade as i         
had seen his previous opponent do. he ground to a halt also, then rushed          
forward and embraced me. i did not understand what he said, but i gathered        
that he was pleased with the workout. so was i.                                   
the horrible thing was, i felt it. i found myself slightly heady.                 
but i needed more. i promised me i would kill myself and exercise that            
day, glut myself with food that night, sleep deeply, wake, and do it again.       
so i went over to where the archers stood. after a time, i borrowed a             
bow, and in my three-fingered style unleashed perhaps a hundred arrows. i         
did not do too badly. then, for a time, i watched the men on horseback,           
with their lances, shields, maces. i moved on. i watched some practice in         
hand-to-hand combat.                                                              
finally, i wrestled three men in succession. then i did feel beat.                
absolutely. entirely.                                                             
i sat down on a bench in the shade, sweating, breathing heavily. i                
wondered about lance, about ganelon, about supper. after perhaps ten              
minutes, i made my way back to the room i bad been given and i bathed             
again.                                                                            
by then i was ravenously hungry, so i set forth to find me dinner and             
information.                                                                      
before i had gone very far from the door, one of the guards whom i                
recognized from the previous evening—the one who had guided me to my              
chamber—approached and said, “lord ganelon bids you dine with him in              
his quarters, at the ringing of the dinner bell.” i thanked him, said i would     
be there, returned to my chamber, and rested on my bed until it was time.         
then i made my way forth once again.                                              
i was beginning to ache deeply and i had a few additional bruises. i              
decided this was a good thing, would help me to seem older. i banged on           
ganelon’s door and a boy admitted me, then dashed off to join another             
youth who was spreading a table near to the fireplace.                            
ganelon wore a green shirt and trousers, green boots and belt, sat in a           
high-backed chair. he rose as i entered, walked forward to greet me.              
“sir corey, i’ve heard report of your doings this day,” he said, clasping         
my hand. “it makes your carrying lance seem more believable. i must say           
you’re more a man than you look—meaning no offense by that.”                      
i chuckled. “no offense.”                                                         
he led me to a chair, handed me a glass of pale wine that was a bit too           
sweet for my taste, then said, “looking at you. i’d say i could push you          
over with one hand—but you carried lance five leagues and killed two of           
those bastard cats on the way. and he told me about the cairn you built, of       
big stones—”                                                                      
“how is lance feeling today?” i interrupted.                                      
“i had to place a guard in his chamber to be sure he rested. the muscle-          
bound clod wanted to get up and walk around. he’ll stay there all week,           
though, by god!”                                                                  
“then he must be feeling better.”                                                 
he nodded.                                                                        
“here’s to his health.”                                                           
“i’ll drink to that.”                                                             
we drank. then: “had i an army of men like you and lance,” he said,               
“the story might have been different.”                                            
“what story?”                                                                     
“the circle and its wardens,” he said. “you’ve not heard of it?”                  
“lance mentioned it. that’s all.”                                                 
one boy tended an enormous chunk of beef on a spit above a low fire.              
occasionally, he sloshed some wine over it as he turned the shaft.                
whenever the odor drifted my way, my stomach would rumble and ganelon             
would chuckle. the other boy left the room to fetch bread from the kitchen.       
ganelon was silent a long while. he finished his wine and poured                  
himself another glass. i sipped slowly at my first.                               
“have you ever heard of avalon?” he finally asked.                                
“yes,” i replied. “there is a verse i heard long ago from a passing bard:         
‘beyond the river of the blessed, there we sat down, yea, we wept, when           
we remembered avalon. our swords were shattered in our hands and we               
hung our shields on the oak tree. the silver towers were fallen, into a sea of    
blood. how many miles to avalon? none, i say, and all. the silver towers          
are fallen.’ ”                                                                    
“avalon fallen…?” he said.                                                        
“i think the man was mad. i know of no avalon. his verse stayed in my             
mind, though.”                                                                    
ganelon averted his face and did not speak again for several minutes.             
when he did, his voice was altered.                                               
“there was,” he said. “there was such a place. i lived there, years ago. i        
did not know it was fallen.”                                                      
“how came you here from that place?” i asked him.                                 
“i was exiled by its sorcerer lord, corwin of amber. he sent me                   
through darkness and madness to this place, that i might suffer and die here      
—and i have suffered and come near to the final lay many a time. i’ve tried       
to find the way back, but nobody knows it. i’ve spoken with sorcerers, and        
even a captured creature of the circle before we slew the thing. but none         
knew the road to avalon. it is as the bard said, ‘no miles, and all’,” he         
misquoted my lyric. “do you recall the bard’s name?”                              
“i am sorry, but i do not.”                                                       
“where is this cabra place you hie from?”                                         
“far to the east, across the waters,” i said. “very far. it is an island          
kingdom.”                                                                         
“any chance they could furnish us with some troops? i can afford to               
pay quite a bit.” i shook my head.                                                
“it is a small place with a small militia, and it would be several months’        
travel both ways—sea and land. they have never fought as mercenaries,             
and for that matter they are not very warlike.”                                   
“then you seem to differ a great deal from your countrymen,” he said,             
looking at me once more. i sipped my wine.                                        
“i was an arms instructor,” i said, “to the royal guard.”                         
“then you might be inclined to hire out, to help train my troops?”                
“i’ll stay a few weeks and do that,” i said.                                      
he nodded a tight-lipped microsecond of a smile, then, “it saddens me             
to hear this indication that fair avalon is gone,” he said. “but if it is so, it  
means that my exiler is also likely dead.” he drained his wineglass. “so          
even the demon came to a time when he could not defend his own,” he               
mused. “that’s a heartening thought. it means we might have a chance here,        
against these demons.”                                                            
“begging your pardon,” i said, sticking my neck out for what i thought            
good reason, “if you were referring to that corwin of amber, he did not die       
when whatever happened happened.” the glass snapped in his hand.                  
“you know corwin?” he said.                                                       
“no, but i know of him,” i replied. “several years ago, i met one of his          
brothers—a fellow named brand. he told me of the place called amber,              
and of the battle in which corwin and a brother of his named bleys led a          
horde against their brother eric, who held the city. bleys fell from the          
mountain kolvir and corwin was taken prisoner. corwin’s eyes were put             
out after eric’s coronation, and he was cast into the dungeons beneath            
amber, where he may yet remain if he has not since died.”                         
ganelon’s face was drained of color as i spoke.                                   
“all those names you mentioned—brand, bleys, eric,” he said. “i heard             
him mention them in days long gone by. how long ago did you hear of this          
thing?”                                                                           
“it was about four years back.”                                                   
“he deserved better.”                                                             
“after what he did to you?”                                                       
“well,” said the man, “i’ve had a lot of time to think about it, and it is        
not as if i gave him no cause for what he did. he was strong—stronger than        
you or lance, even—and clever. also, he could be merry on occasion. eric          
should have killed him quickly, not the way that he did. i’ve no love for         
him, but my hate’s died down a bit. the demon deserved better than he got,        
that’s all.”                                                                      
the second boy returned with a basket of bread. the one who had                   
prepared the meat removed it from the spit and set it on a platter in the         
center of the table.                                                              
ganelon nodded toward it. “let’s eat,” he said.                                   
he rose and moved to the table.                                                   
i followed. we did not talk much during the meal.                                 
after stuffing myself until my stomach would hold no more and soaking             
down its contents with another glass of too-sweet wine, i began to yawn.          
ganelon cursed after the third one.                                               
“damn it, corey! stop that! it’s contagious!” he stifled a yawn of his            
own. “let’s take some air,” he said, rising.                                      
so we walked out along the walls, passing the sentries in their rounds. they      
would come to attention and salute ganelon as soon as they saw who it was         
approaching, and he would give them a word of greeting and we would               
move on. we came to a battlement, where we paused to rest, seating                
ourselves on the stone, sucking in the evening air, cool and damp and full of     
the forest, and noting the appearance of the stars, one by one, in the            
darkening sky. the stone was cold beneath me. far off in the distance, i          
thought i could detect the shimmer of the sea. i heard a night bird, from         
somewhere below us. ganelon produced a pipe and tobacco from a pouch              
he wore at his belt. he filled it, tamped it, and struck a flame. his face        
would have been satanic in the spark light, save for whatever turned his          
mouth downward and drew the muscles in his cheeks up into that angle              
formed by the inner corners of his eyes and the sharp bridge of his nose. a       
devil is supposed to have an evil grin, and this one looked too morose.           
i smelled the smoke. after a time, he began to speak, softly and very             
slowly at first:                                                                  
“i remember avalon,” he began. “my birth there was not ignoble, but               
virtue was never one of my strong points. i went through my inheritance           
quickly and i took to the roads where i waylaid travelers. later, i joined        
with a band of other men such as myself. when i discovered i was the              
strongest and most fit to lead, i became the leader. there were prices on all     
our heads. mine was the highest.”                                                 
he spoke more rapidly now, and his voice grew more refined and his                
choice of words came as an echo from out of his past.                             
“yes, i remember avalon,” he said, “a place of silver and shade and               
cool waters, where the stars shone like bonfires at night and the green of        
day was always the green of spring. youth, love, beauty—i knew them in            
avalon. proud steeds, bright metal, soft lips, dark ale. honor…” he shook         
his head.                                                                         
“one later day,” he said, “when war commenced within the realm, the               
ruler offered full pardon to any outlaws who would follow him in battle           
against the insurgents. this was corwin. i threw in with him and rode off to      
the wars. i became an officer, and then—later—a member of his staff. we           
won the battles, put down the uprising. then corwin ruled peacefully once         
more, and i remained, at his court. those were the good years. there later        
came some border skirmishes, but these we always won. he trusted me to            
handle such things for him. then he granted a dukedom to dignify the              
house of a minor noble whose daughter he desired in marriage. i had               
wanted that dukedom, and he had long hinted it might one day be mine. i           
was furious, and i betrayed my command the next time i was dispatched to          
settle a dispute along the southern border, where something was always            
stirring. many of my men died, and the invaders entered into the realm.           
before they could be routed, lord corwin himself had to take up arms once         
more. the invaders had come through in great strength, and i thought they         
would conquer the realm. i hoped they would. but corwin, again, with his          
foxy tactics, prevailed. i fled, but was captured and taken to him for            
sentencing. i cursed him and spat at him. i would not bow. i hated the            
ground he trod, and a condemned man has no reason not to put up the best          
front he can, to go out like a man. corwin said he would show me a                
measure of mercy for favors past. i told him to shove his mercy, and then i       
realized that he was mocking me. he ordered me released and he                    
approached me. i knew he could kill me with his hands. i tried to fight with      
him, but to no avail. he struck me once and i fell. when i awakened, i was        
strapped across his horse’s rump. he rode along, jibing at me the while. i        
would not reply to anything he said, but we rode through wondrous lands           
and lands out of nightmare, which is one way i learned of his sorcerous           
power—for no traveler i have ever met has passed through the places i saw         
that day. then he pronounced my exile, released me in this place, turned,         
and rode away.”                                                                   
he paused to relight his pipe, which had gone out, puffed upon it for a           
time, went on: “many a bruising, cudgeling, biting, and beating did i take in     
this place, at the hands of man and beast, only barely preserving my life. he     
had left me in the wickedest portion of the realm. but then one day my            
fortunes took a turn. an armored knight bade me depart the roadway that he        
might pass. at that point, i cared not whether i lived or died, so i called him   
a pock-marked whoreson and bade him go to the devil. he charged me and            
i seized his lance and pushed its point into the ground, so unhorsing him. i      
drew him a smile beneath his chin with his own dagger, and thus obtained          
me mounting and weapons. then did i set about paying back those who had           
used me poorly. i took up my old trade on the highways once again and i           
gained me another band of followers. we grew. when there were hundreds            
of us our needs were considerable. we would ride into a small town and            
make it ours. the local militia would fear us. this, too, was a good life,        
though not so splendid as the avalon i never shall know again. all the            
roadside inns came to fear the thunder of our mounts, and travelers would         
soil their britches when they heard us coming. ha! this lasted for several        
years. large parties of armed men were sent to track us and destroy us, but       
always we evaded them or ambushed them. then one day there was the                
dark circle, and no one really knows why.”                                        
he puffed more vigorously on his pipe, stared off into the distance.              
“i am told it began as a tiny ring of toadstools, far to the west. a child        
was found dead in its center, and the man who found her—her father—died           
of convulsions several days later. the spot was immediately said to be            
accursed. it grew quickly in the months that followed, until it was half a        
league across. the grasses darkened and shone like metal within it, but did       
not die. the trees twisted and their leaves blackened. they swayed when           
there was no wind, and bats danced and darted among them. in the twilight,        
strange shapes could be seen moving—always within the circle, mind you            
—and there were lights, as of small fires, throughout the night. the circle       
continued to grow, and those who lived near it fled—mostly. a few                 
remained. it was said that those who remained had struck some bargain             
with the dark things. and the circle continued to widen, spreading like the       
ripple from a rock cast into a pond. more and more people remained, living,       
within it. i have spoken with these people, fought with them, slain them. it      
is as if there is something dead inside them all. their voices lack the thrust    
and dip of men chewing over their words and tasting them. they seldom do          
much with their faces, but wear them like death masks. they began to leave        
the circle in bands, marauding. they slew wantonly. they committed many           
atrocities and defiled places of worship. they put things to the torch when       
they left them. they never stole objects of silver. then, after many months,      
other creatures than men began to come forth—strangely formed, like the           
hellcats you slew.                                                                
“then the circle slowed in its growth, almost halting, as though it were          
nearing some sort of limit. but now all manner of raiders emerged from it—        
some even faring forth during the day—laying waste to the countryside             
about its borders. when they had devastated the land about its entire             
circumference, the circle moved to encompass those areas, also. and so its        
growth began again, in this fashion. the old king, uther, who had long            
hunted me, forgot all about me and set his forces to patrolling that damned       
circle. it was beginning to worry me, also, as i did not relish the notion of     
being seized by some hell-spawned bloodsucker as i slept. so i got together       
fifty-five of my men—that was all who would volunteer, and i wanted no            
cowards—and we rode into that place one afternoon. we came upon a pack            
of those dead-faced men burning a live goat on a stone altar and we lit into      
the lot of them. we took one prisoner and tied him to his own altar and           
questioned him there. he told us that the circle would grow until it covered      
the entire land, from ocean to ocean. one day it would close with itself on       
the other side of the world. we had best join with them, if we wished to          
save our hides.                                                                   
then one of my men stabbed him and he died. he really died, for i                 
know a dead man when i see one. i’ve made it happen often enough. but as          
his blood fell upon the stone, his mouth opened and out came the loudest          
laugh i ever heard in my life. it was like thunder all about us. then he sat      
up, unbreathing, and began to burn. as he burned, his form changed, until it      
was like that of the burning goat—only larger—there upon the altar. then a        
voice came from the thing. it said, ‘flee, mortal man! but you shall never        
leave this circle!’ and believe me, we fled! the sky grew black with bats         
and other—things. we heard the sound of hoofbeats. we rode with our               
blades in our hands, killing everything that came near us. there were cats        
such as you slew, and snakes and hopping things, and god knows what all           
else. as we neared the edge of the circle, one of king uther’s patrols saw        
us and came to our aid. sixteen of the fifty-five who had ridden in with me       
rode back out. and the patrol lost perhaps thirty men itself. when they saw       
who i was, they hustled me off to court. here. this used to be uther’s            
palace.                                                                           
i told him what i had done, what i had seen and heard. he did with me             
as corwin had. he offered full pardon to me and to my men if we would             
join with him against the wardens of the circle. having gone through what         
i had gone through, i realized that the thing had to be stopped. so i agreed.     
then i fell ill, i am told that i was delirious for three days. i was as weak as  
a child after my recovery, and i learned that everyone who had entered the        
circle had been likewise taken. three had died. i visited the rest of my men,     
told them the story, and they were enlisted.                                      
the patrols about the circle were strengthened. but it would not be               
contained. in the years that followed, the circle grew. we fought many            
skirmishes. i was promoted until i stood at uther’s right hand, as once i had     
at corwin’s. then the skirmishes became more than skirmishes. larger and          
larger parties emerged from that hellhole. we lost a few battles. they took       
some of our outposts. then one night an army emerged, an army—a horde             
—of both men and the other things that dwelled there. that night we met           
the largest force we had ever engaged. king uther himself rode to battle,         
against my advice—for he was advanced in years—and he fell that night             
and the land was without a ruler. i wanted my captain, lancelot, to sit in        
stewardship, for i knew him to be a far more honorable man than myself…           
and it is strange here. i had known a lancelot, just like him, in avalon          
—but this man knew me not when first we met. it is strange… at any rate,          
he declined, and the position was thrust upon me. i hate it, but here i am. i     
have held them back for over three years now. all my instincts tell me to         
flee. what do i owe these damned people? what do i care if the bloody             
circle widens? i could cross over the sea to some land it would never reach       
during my lifetime, and then forget the whole thing. damn it! i didn’t want       
this responsibility! now it is mine, though!”                                     
“why?” i asked him, and the sound of my own voice was strange to me.              
there was silence.                                                                
he emptied his pipe. he refilled it. he relit it. he puffed it.                   
there was more silence.                                                           
then, “i don’t know,” he said. “i’d stab a man in the back for a pair of          
shoes, if he had them and i needed them to keep my feet from freezing. i          
once did, that’s how i know. but… this is different. this is a thing hurting      
everybody, and i’m the only one who can do the job. god damn it! i know           
they’re going to bury me here one day, along with all the rest of them. but i     
can’t pull out. i’ve got to hold that thing back as long as i can.”               
my head was cleared by the cold night air, which gave my                          
consciousness a second wind, so to speak, though my body felt mildly              
anesthetized about me.                                                            
“couldn’t lance lead them?” i asked.                                              
“i’d say so. he’s a good man. but there is another reason. i think that           
goat-thing, whatever it was, on the altar, is a bit afraid of me. i had gone in   
there and it had told me i’d never make it back out again, but i did. i lived     
through the sickness that followed after. it knows it’s me that has been          
fighting it all along. we won that great bloody engagement on the night           
uther died, and i met the thing again in a different form and it knew me.         
maybe this is a part of what is holding it back now.”                             
“what form?”                                                                      
“a thing with a manlike shape, but with goat horns and red eyes. it was           
mounted on a piebald stallion. we fought for a time, but the tide of the          
battle swept us apart. which was a good thing, too, for it was winning. it        
spoke again, as we swaggered swords, and i knew that head-filling voice. it       
called me a fool and told me i could never hope to win. but when morning          
came, the field was ours and we drove them back to the circle, slaying            
them as they fled. the rider of the piebald escaped. there have been other        
sallyings forth since then, but none such as that night’s. if i were to leave     
this land, another such army—one that is readying even now—would come             
forth. that thing would somehow know of my departure—just as it knew              
that lance was bringing me another report on the disposition of troops            
within the circle, sending those wardens to destroy him as he returned. it        
knows of you by now, and surely it must wonder over this development. it          
must wonder who you are, for all your strength. i will stay here and fight it     
till i fall. i must. do not ask me why. i only hope that before that day          
comes, i at least learn how this thing came to pass—why that circle is out        
there.”                                                                           
then there came a fluttering near to my head. i ducked quickly to avoid           
whatever it was. it was not necessary, though. it was only a bird. a white        
bird. it landed on my left shoulder and stood there, making small noises. i       
held up my wrist and it hopped over onto it there was a note tied to its leg.     
i unfastened it, read it, crumpled it in my hand. then i studied invisible        
things distant.                                                                   
“what is the matter, sir corey?” cried ganelon.                                   
the note, which i had sent on ahead to my destination, written in my              
own hand, transmitted by a bird of my desire, could only reach the place          
that had to be my next stop. this was not precisely the place that i had in       
mind. however, i could read my own omens.                                         
“what is it?” he asked. “what is it that you hold? a message?”                    
i nodded. i handed it to him. i could not very well throw it away, since          
he had seen me take it. it read, “i am coming,” and it bore my signature.         
ganelon puffed his pipe and read it in the glow.                                  
“he lives? and he would come here?” he said.                                      
“so it would seem.”                                                               
“this is very strange,” he said. “i do not understand it at all…”                 
“it sounds like a promise of assistance,” i said, dismissing the bird,            
which cooed twice, then circled my head and departed.                             
ganelon shook his head.                                                           
“i do not understand.”                                                            
“why number the teeth of a horse you may receive for nothing?” i said.            
“you have only succeeded in containing that thing.”                               
“true,” he said. “perhaps he could destroy it.”                                   
“and perhaps it’s just a joke,” i told him. “a cruel one.”                        
he shook his head again.                                                          
“no. that is not his style. i wonder what he is after?”                           
“sleep on it,” i suggested.                                                       
“there is little else that i can do, just now,” he said, stifling a yawn.         
we rose then and walked the wall. we said our good nights, and i                  
staggered off toward the pit of sleep and fell headlong into it.                  
                                                                     
chapter 2                                                                         
day. more aches. more pains.                                                      
someone had left me a new cloak, a brown one, which i decided was a               
good thing. especially if i put on more weight and ganelon recalled my            
colors. i did not shave my beard, because be had known me in a slightly           
less hairy condition. i took pains to disguise my voice whenever he was           
about. i hid grayswandir beneath my bed.                                          
for all of the following week i drove myself ruthlessly. i worked and             
sweated and strove until the aches subsided and my muscles grew firm once         
more. i think i put on fifteen pounds that week. slowly, very slowly, i began     
feeling like my old self.                                                         
the country was called lorraine, and so was she. if i happened to be in           
the mood to hand you a line, i would tell you we met in a meadow behind           
the castle, she gathering flowers and me walking there for exercise and           
fresh air. crap.                                                                  
i guess a polite term would be camp follower. i met her at the end of a           
hard day’s work, spent mainly with the saber and the mace. she was                
standing off on the side lines waiting for her date when i first caught sight     
of her. she smiled and i smiled back, nodded, winked, and passed her by.          
the next day i saw her again, and i said “hello” as i passed her. that’s all.     
well, i kept running into her. by the end of my second week, when my              
aches were gone and i was over a hundred-eighty pounds and feeling that           
way again, i arranged to be with her one evening. by then, i was aware of         
her status and it was fine, so far as i was concerned. but we did not do the      
usual thing that night. no.                                                       
instead, we talked, and then something else happened.                             
her hair was rust-colored with a few strands of gray in it. i guessed she         
was under thirty, though. eyes, very blue. slightly pointed chin. clean, even     
teeth inside a mouth that smiled at me a lot. her voice was somewhat nasal,       
her hair was too long, her make-up laid on too heavily over too much              
tiredness, her complexion too freckled, her choice in clothing too bright and     
tight. but i liked her. i did not think i’d actually feel that way when i asked   
her out that night because, as i said, liking her was not what i had in mind.     
there was no place to go but my chamber, so we had gone there. i had              
become a captain, and i took advantage of my rank by having dinner                
brought to us, and an extra bottle of wine.                                       
“the men are afraid of you,” she said. “they say you never grow tired.”           
“i do,” i said, “believe me.”                                                     
“of course,” she said, shaking her too-long locks and smiling. “don’t             
we all?”                                                                          
“i daresay,” i replied.                                                           
“how old are you?”                                                                
“how old are you?”                                                                
“a gentleman would not ask that question.”                                        
“neither would a lady?”                                                           
“when you first came here, they thought you were over fifty.”                     
“and…?”                                                                           
“and now they have no idea. forty-five? forty?”                                   
“no,” i said.                                                                     
“i didn’t think so. but your beard fooled everyone.”                              
“beards often do that.”                                                           
“you look better every day. bigger…”                                              
“thanks. i feel better than i did when i arrived.”                                
“sir corey of cabra,” she said. “where’s cabra? what’s cabra? will                
you take me there with you, if i ask you nicely?”                                 
“i’d tell you so,” i said, “but i’d be lying.”                                    
“i know. but it would be nice to hear.”                                           
“okay. i’ll take you there with me. it’s place.”                                  
“are you really as good as the men say?”                                          
“i’m afraid not. are you?”                                                        
“not really. do you want to go to bed now?”                                       
“no. i’d rather talk. have a glass of wine.”                                      
“thank you… your health.”                                                         
“yours.”                                                                          
“why is it you are such a good swordsman?”                                        
“aptitude and good teachers.”                                                     
“…and you carried lance all that distance and slew those beasts…”                 
“stories grow with the telling.”                                                  
“but i have watched you. you are better than the others. that is why              
ganelon made you whatever deal he did. he knows a good thing when he              
sees it. i’ve had many friends who were swordsmen, and i’ve watched them          
at practice. you could cut them to pieces. the men say you are a good             
teacher. they like you, even if you do scare them.”                               
“why do i frighten them? because i am strong? there are many strong               
men in the world. because i can stand up and swing a blade for a long             
while?”                                                                           
“they think there is something supernatural involved.”                            
i laughed.                                                                        
“no, i’m just the second-best swordsman around. pardon me—maybe                   
the third. but i try harder.”                                                     
“who’s better?”                                                                   
“eric of amber, possibly.”                                                        
“who is he?”                                                                      
“a supernatural creature.”                                                        
“he’s the best?”                                                                  
“no.”                                                                             
“who is?”                                                                         
“benedict of amber.”                                                              
“is he one, too?”                                                                 
“if he is still alive, he is.”                                                    
“strange, that’s what you are,” she said. “and why? tell me. are you a            
supernatural creature?”                                                           
“let’s have another glass of wine.”                                               
“it’ll go to my head.”                                                            
“good.” i poured them.                                                            
“we are all going to die,” she said.                                              
“eventually.”                                                                     
“i mean here, soon, fighting this thing.”                                         
“why do you say that?”                                                            
“it’s too strong.”                                                                
“then why stick around?”                                                          
“i’ve no place else to go. that’s why i ask you about cabra”                      
“and why you came here tonight?”                                                  
“no. i came to see what you were like.”                                           
“i am an athlete who is breaking training. were you born around here?”            
“yes. in the wood”                                                                
“why’d you pick up with these guys?”                                              
“why not? it’s better than getting pig shit on my heels every day.”               
“never have a man of your own? steady, i mean?”                                   
“yes. he’s dead. he’s the one who found… the fairy ring.”                         
“i’m sorry.”                                                                      
“i’m not. he used to get drunk whenever he could borrow or steal                  
enough to afford it and then come home and beat me. i was glad when i met         
ganelon.”                                                                         
“so you think that the thing is too strong, that we are going to lose to          
it?”                                                                              
“yes.”                                                                            
“you may be right. but i think you’re wrong.” she shrugged.                       
“you’ll be fighting with us?”                                                     
“i’m afraid so.”                                                                  
“nobody knew for sure, or would say if they did. that might prove                 
interesting. i’d like to see you fight with the goat-man.”                        
“why?”                                                                            
“because he seems to be their leader. if you killed him, we’d have more           
of a chance. you might be able to do it.”                                         
“i have to,” i said.                                                              
“special reason?”                                                                 
“yes.”                                                                            
“private one?”                                                                    
“yes.”                                                                            
“good luck.”                                                                      
“thanks.”                                                                         
she finished her wine, so i poured her another.                                   
“i know he is a supernatural creature,” she said.                                 
“let’s get off the subject.”                                                      
“all right. but will you do me a thing?”                                          
“name it.”                                                                        
“put on armor tomorrow, pick up a lance, get hold of a horse, and                 
trounce that big cavalry officer harald.”                                         
“why?”                                                                            
“he beat me last week, just like jarl used to. can you do it?”                    
“yes.”                                                                            
“will you?”                                                                       
“why not? consider him trounced.”                                                 
she came over and leaned against me.                                              
“i love you,” she said.                                                           
“crap.”                                                                           
“all right. how about, i like you?”                                               
“good enough. i—”                                                                 
then a chill and numbing wind blew along my spine. i stiffened and                
resisted what was to come by blanking my mind completely.                         
someone was looking for me. it was someone of the house of amber,                 
doubtless, and he was using my trump or something very like it. there was         
no mistaking the sensation. if it was eric, then he had more guts than i gave     
him credit for, since i had almost napalmed his brain the last time we had        
been in contact. it could not be random, unless he was out of prison, which       
i doubted. if it was julian or caine, they could go to hell. bleys was            
probably dead. possibly benedict, too. that left gerard, brand, and our           
sisters. of these, only gerard might mean me well. so i resisted discovery,       
successfully. it took me perhaps five minutes, and when it was finished i         
was shaking and sweating and lorraine was staring at me strangely.                
“what happened?” she asked. “you aren’t drunk yet, and neither am i.”             
“just a spell i sometimes get,” i said. “it’s a disease i picked up in the        
islands.”                                                                         
“i saw a face,” she said. “perhaps it was on the floor, maybe it was in           
my head. it was an old man. the collar of his garment was green and he            
looked a lot like you, except that his beard was gray.” i slapped her then.       
“you’re lying! you couldn’t have…”                                                
“i’m just telling you what i saw! don’t hit me! i don’t know what it              
meant! who was he?”                                                               
“i think it was my father. god, it’s strange…”                                    
“what happened?” she repeated.                                                    
“a spell,” i said. “i sometimes get them, and people think they see my            
father on the castle wall or floor. don’t worry about it. it’s not contagious.”   
“crap,” she said. “you’re lying to me.”                                           
“i know. but please forget the whole thing.”                                      
“why should i?”                                                                   
“because you like me,” i told her. “remember? and because i’m going               
to trounce harald for you tomorrow.”                                              
“that’s true,” she said, and i started shaking again and she fetched a            
blanket from the bed and put it about my shoulders.                               
she handed me my wine and i drank it. she sat beside me and rested her            
head on my shoulder, so i put my arm about her. a devil wind began to             
scream and i heard the rapid rattle of the rainfall that came with it. for a      
second, it seemed that something beat against the shutters. lorraine              
whimpered slightly.                                                               
“i do not like what is happening tonight,” she said.                              
“neither do i. go bar the door. it’s only bolted right now.”                      
as she did this, i moved our seat so that it faced my single window. i            
fetched grayswandir out from beneath the bed and unsheathed it. then i            
extinguished every light in the room, save for a single candle on the table to    
my right.                                                                         
i reseated myself, my blade across my knees.                                      
“what are we doing?” lorraine asked, as she came and sat down at my               
left.                                                                             
“waiting,” i said.                                                                
“for what?”                                                                       
“i am not positive, but this is certainly the night for it.”                      
she shuddered and drew near.                                                      
“you know, perhaps you had better leave,” i said.                                 
“i know,” she said, “but i’m afraid to go out. you’ll be able to protect          
me if i stay here, won’t you?”                                                    
i shook my head.                                                                  
“i don’t even know if i’ll be able to protect myself.”                            
she touched grayswandir.                                                          
“what a beautiful blade! i’ve never seen one like it.”                            
“there isn’t another,” i said, and each time that i shifted a little, the         
light fell differently upon it, so that one moment it seemed filmed over with     
unhuman blood of an orange tint and the next it lay there cold and white as       
snow or a woman’s breast, quivering in my hand each time a little chill took      
me.                                                                               
i wondered how it was that lorraine had seen something i had not                  
daring the attempted contact. she could not simply have imagined anything         
that close to home.                                                               
“there is something strange about you” i said.                                    
she was silent for four or five flickerings of the candle, then said, “i’ve       
a touch of the second sight. my mother had more of it. people say my              
grandmother was a sorceress. i don’t know any of that business, though.           
well, not much of it. i haven’t done it for years. i always wind up losing        
more than i gain.”                                                                
then she was silent again, and i asked her, “what do you mean?”                   
“i used a spell to get my first man,” she said, “and look what he turned          
out to be. if i hadn’t, i’d have been a lot better off. i wanted a pretty         
daughter, and i made that happen-” she stopped abruptly and i realized she        
was crying.                                                                       
“what’s the matter? i don’t understand…”                                          
“i thought you knew,” she said.                                                   
“no, i’m afraid not.”                                                             
“she was the little girl in the fairy circle. i thought you knew…”                
“i’m sorry.”                                                                      
“i wish i didn’t have the touch. i never use it any more. but it won’t let        
me alone. it still brings me dreams and signs, and they are never over things     
i can do anything about. i wish it would go away and devil somebody else!”        
“that’s the one thing it will not do, lorraine. i’m afraid you are stuck          
with it.”                                                                         
“how do you know?”                                                                
“i’ve known people like you in the past, that’s all.”                             
“you’ve a touch of it yourself, haven’t you?”                                     
“yes.”                                                                            
“then you feel that there is something out there now, don’t you?”                 
“yes.”                                                                            
“so do i. do you know what it is doing?”                                          
“it’s looking for me.”                                                            
“yes, i feel that, too. why?”                                                     
“perhaps to test my strength. it knows that i am here. if i am a new ally         
come to ganelon, it must wonder what i represent, who i am…”                      
“is it the horned one himself?”                                                   
“i don’t know. i think not, though.”                                              
“why not?”                                                                        
“if i am really he who would destroy it, it would be foolish to seek me           
out here in the keep of its enemy when i am surrounded by strength. i             
would say one of its minions is looking for me. perhaps, somehow, that is         
what my father’s ghost… i do not know. if its servant finds me and names          
me, it will know what preparations to make. if it finds me and destroys me,       
it will have solved the problem. if i destroy the servant, it will know that      
much more about my strength. whichever way it works out, the horned one           
will be something ahead. so why should it risk its own pronged dome at            
this stage in the game?”                                                          
we waited, there in the shadow-clad chamber, as the taper burned away             
the minutes.                                                                      
she asked me, “what did you mean when you said, if it finds you and               
names you…? names you what?”                                                      
“the one who almost did not come here,” i said.                                   
“you think that it might know you from somewhere, somehow?” she                   
asked.                                                                            
“i think it might,” i said. she drew away from me then.                           
“don’t be afraid,” i said. “i won’t hurt you.”                                    
“i am afraid, and you will hurt me!” she said. “i know it! but i want             
you! why do i want you?”                                                          
“i don’t know,” i said.                                                           
“there is something out there now!” she said, sounding slightly                   
hysterical. “it’s near! it’s very near! listen! listen!”                          
“shut up!” i said, as a cold, prickly feeling came to rest on the back of         
my neck and coiled about my throat. “get over on the far side of the room,        
behind the bed!”                                                                  
“i’m afraid of the dark,” she said.                                               
“do it, or i’ll have to knock you out and carry you. you’ll be in my way          
here.”                                                                            
i could hear a heavy flapping above the storm, and there came a                   
scratching on the stone of the wall as she moved to obey me.                      
then i was looking into two hot, red eyes which were looking back into            
my own. i dropped mine quickly. the thing stood there on the ledge outside        
the window and regarded me.                                                       
it was well over six feet in height, with great branches of antlers               
growing out of its forehead. nude, its flesh was a uniform ash-gray in color.     
it appeared to be sexless, and it had gray, leathery wings extending far out      
behind it and joining with the night. it held a short, heavy sword of dark        
metal in its right hand, and there were runes carved all along the blade.         
with its left hand, it clutched at the lattice.                                   
“enter at your peril,” i said loudly, and i raised the point of                   
grayswandir to indicate its breast.                                               
it chuckled. it just stood there and chuckled and giggled at me. it tried         
to meet my eyes once more, but i would not let it. if it looked into my eyes      
for long, it would know me, as the hellcat had known me.                          
when it spoke, it sounded like a bassoon blowing words.                           
“you are not the one,” it said, “for you are smaller and older. yet… that         
blade… it could be his. who are you?”                                             
“who are you?” i asked.                                                           
“strygalldwir is my name. conjure with it and i will eat your heart and           
liver.”                                                                           
“conjure with it? i can’t even pronounce it,” i said, “and my cirrhosis           
would give you indigestion. go away.”                                             
“who are you?” it repeated.                                                       
“misli, gammi gra’dil, strygalldwir,” i said, and it jumped as if given a         
hotfoot.                                                                          
“you seek to drive me forth with such a simple spell?” it asked when it           
settled again. “i am not one of the lesser ones.”                                 
“it seemed to make you a bit uncomfortable.”                                      
“who are you?” it said again.                                                     
“none of your business, charlie. ladybird, ladybird, fly away home                
—”                                                                                
“four times must i ask you and four times be refused before i may enter           
and slay you. who are you?”                                                       
“no,” i said, standing. “come on in and burn!”                                    
then it tore away the latticework, and the wind that accompanied it into          
the chamber extinguished the candle.                                              
i lunged forward, and there were sparks between us when grayswandir               
met the dark rune-sword. we clashed, then i sprang back. my eyes had              
adjusted to the half dark, so the loss of the light did not blind me. the         
creature saw well enough, also. it was stronger than a man, but then so am        
i. we circled the room. an icy wind moved about us, and when we passed            
the window again, cold droplets lashed my face. the first time that i cut the     
creature—a long slash across the breast—it remained silent, though tiny           
flames danced about the edges of the wound. the second time that i cut it—        
high upon the arm—it cried out, cursing me.                                       
“tonight i will suck the marrow from your bones!” it said. “i will dry            
them and work them most cunningly into instruments of music! whenever i           
play upon them, your spirit will writhe in bodiless agony!”                       
“you burn prettily,” i said.                                                      
it slowed for a fraction of a second, and my opportunity was there.               
i beat that dark blade aside and my lunge was perfect. the center of its          
breast was my target. i ran it through.                                           
it howled then, but did not fall. grayswandir was torn from my grasp              
and flames bloomed about the wound. it stood there wearing them. it               
advanced a step toward me and i picked up a small chair and held it               
between us.                                                                       
“i do not keep my heart where men do,” it said.                                   
then it lunged, but i blocked the blow with the chair and caught it in the        
right eye with one of the legs. i throw the chair to the side then, and           
stepping forward, seized its right wrist and turned it over. i struck the elbow   
with the edge of my hand, as hard as i could. there came a sharp crack and        
the runesword clattered to the floor. then its left hand struck my head and i     
fell.                                                                             
it leaped for the blade, and i seized its ankle and jerked.                       
it sprawled, and i threw myself atop it and found its throat. i turned my         
head into the hollow of my shoulder, chin against my breast, as it clawed         
for my face with its left hand.                                                   
as my death grip tightened, its eyes sought mine, and this time i did not         
avoid them. there came a tiny shock at the base of my brain, as we both           
knew that we knew.                                                                
“you!” it managed to gasp, before i twisted my hands hard and the life            
went out of those red, red eyes.                                                  
i stood, put my foot upon its carcass, and withdrew grayswandir.                  
the thing burst into flames when my blade came free, and kept burning             
until there was nothing remaining but a charred spot upon the floor.              
then lorraine came over and i put my arm about her and she asked me               
to take her back to her quarters and to bed. so i did, but we didn’t do           
anything but lie there together until she had cried herself to sleep. that is     
how i met lorraine.                                                               
lance and ganelon and i sat atop our mounts on a high hill, the late              
morning sun hitting us in the back, and we looked down into the place. its        
appearance confirmed things for me.                                               
it was akin to that twisted wood that filled the valley to the south of           
amber.                                                                            
oh my father! what have i wrought? i said within my heart, but there              
was no answer other than the dark circle that lay beneath me and spread for       
as far as the eye could see.                                                      
through the bars of my visor, i looked down upon it—charred-seeming,              
desolate, and smelling of decay. i lived inside my visor these days. the men      
looked upon it as an affectation, but my rank gave me the right to be             
eccentric. i had worn it for over two weeks, since my battle with                 
strygalldwir. i had put it on the following morning before i trounced harald      
to keep my promise to lorraine, and i had decided that as my girth                
increased i had better keep my face concealed.                                    
i weighed perhaps fourteen stone now, and felt like my old self again. if         
i could help clean up this mess in the land called lorraine, i knew that i        
would have a chance at least to try what i most wanted, and perhaps               
succeed.                                                                          
“so that’s it,” i said. “i don’t see any troops mustering.”                       
“i believe we will have to ride north,” said lance, “and we will                  
doubtless only see them after dark.”                                              
“how far north?”                                                                  
“three or four leagues. they move about a bit.”                                   
we had ridden for two days to reach the circle. we had met a patrol               
earlier that morning and learned that the troops inside the thing continued to    
muster every night. they went through various drills and then were gone—          
to someplace deeper inside—with the coming of morning. a perpetual                
thunderhead, i learned, rode above the circle, though the storm never             
broke.                                                                            
“shall we breakfast here and then ride north?” i asked.                           
“why not?” said ganelon. “i’m starved and we’ve time.”                            
so we dismounted and ate dried meat and drank from our canteens.                  
“i still do not understand that note,” said ganelon, after belching,              
patting his stomach, and lighting his pipe. “will he stand beside us in the       
final battle, or will he not? where is he, if he intends to help? the day of      
conflict draws nearer and nearer.”                                                
“forget him,” i said. “it was probably a joke.”                                   
“i can’t, damn it!” he said. “there is something passing strange about            
the whole business!”                                                              
“what is it?” asked lance, and for the first time i realized that ganelon         
had not told him.                                                                 
“my old liege, lord corwin, sends an odd message by carrier bird,                 
saying he is coming. i had thought him dead, but he sent this message,”           
ganelon told him. “i still do not know what to make of it.”                       
“corwin?” said lance, and i held my breath. “corwin of amber?”                    
“yes, amber and avalon.”                                                          
“forget his message.”                                                             
“why?”                                                                            
“he is a man without honor, and his promise means nothing.”                       
“you know him?”                                                                   
“i know of him. long ago, he ruled in this land. do you not recall the            
stories of the demon lordling? they are the same. that was corwin, in days        
before my days. the best thing he did was abdicate and flee when the              
resistance grew too strong against him.”                                          
that was not true! or was it?                                                     
amber casts an infinity of shadows, and my avalon had cast many of its            
own, because of my presence there. i might be known on many earths that i         
had never trod, for shadows of myself had walked them, mimicking                  
imperfectly my deeds and my thoughts.                                             
“no,” said ganelon, “i never paid heed to the old stories. i wonder if it         
could have been the same man, ruling here. that is interesting.”                  
“very,” i agreed, to keep my hand in things. “but if he ruled so long             
ago, surely he must be dead or decrepit by now.”                                  
“he was a sorcerer,” said lance.                                                  
“the one i knew certainly was,” said ganelon, “for he banished me                 
from a land neither art nor artifice can discover now.”                           
“you never spoke of this before,” said lance. “how did it occur?”                 
“none of your business,” said ganelon, and lance was silent once                  
again.                                                                            
i hauled out my own pipe—i had obtained one two days earlier—and                  
lance did the same. it was a clay job and drew hot and hard. we lit up, and       
the three of us sat there smoking.                                                
“well, he did the smart thing,” said ganelon. “let’s forget it now.”              
we did not, of course. but we stayed away from the subject after that.            
if it had not been for the dark thing behind us, it would have been quite         
pleasant, just sitting there, relaxing. suddenly, i felt close to the two of      
them. i wanted to say something, but i could not think what.                      
ganelon solved that by bringing up current business once more.                    
“so you want to hit them before they hit us?” he said.                            
“that’s right,” i replied. “take the fight to their home territory.”              
“the trouble is that it is their home territory,” he said. “they know it          
better than we do now, and who knows what powers they might be able to            
call on there?”                                                                   
“kill the horned one and they will crumble,” i said.                              
“perhaps. perhaps not. maybe you could do it,” said ganelon. “unless i            
got lucky, though, i don’t know whether i could. he’s too mean to die             
easily. while i think i’m still as good a man as i was some years ago, i may      
be fooling myself. perhaps i’ve grown soft. i never wanted this damn stay-        
at-home job!”                                                                     
“i know,” i said.                                                                 
“i know,” said lance.                                                             
“lance,” said ganelon, “should we do as our friend here says? should              
we attack?”                                                                       
he could have shrugged and equivocated. he did not.                               
“yes,” he said. “they almost had us last time. it was very close the              
night king uther died. if we do not attack them now, i feel they may defeat       
us next time. oh, it would not be easy, and we would hurt them badly. but i       
think they could do it. let us see what we can see now, then make our plans       
for an attack.”                                                                   
“all right,” said ganelon. “i am sick of waiting too. tell me that again          
after we return and i’ll go along with it.” so we did that thing.                 
we rode north that afternoon, and we hid ourselves in the hills and looked        
down upon the circle. within it, they worshiped, after their fashion, and         
they drilled. i estimated around four thousand troops. we had about twenty-       
five hundred. they also had weird flying, hopping, crawling things that           
made noises in the night. we had stout hearts. yeah.                              
all that i needed was a few minutes alone with their leader, and it would         
be decided, one way or another. the whole thing. i could not tell my              
companions that, but it was true.                                                 
you see, i was the party responsible for the whole thing down there. i            
had done it, and it was up to me to undo it, if i could.                          
i was afraid that i could not.                                                    
in a fit of passion, compounded of rage, horror, and pain, i had                  
unleashed this thing, and it was reflected somewhere in every earth in            
existence. such is the blood curse of a prince of amber.                          
we watched them all that night, the wardens of the circle, and in the             
morning we departed.                                                              
the verdict was, attack!                                                          
so we rode all the way back and nothing followed us. when we reached              
the keep of ganelon, we fell to planning. our troops were ready—over-             
ready, perhaps—and we decided to strike within a fortnight.                       
as i lay with lorraine, i told her of these things. for i felt that she           
should know. i possessed the power to spirit her away into shadow—that            
very night, if she would agree. she did not.                                      
“i’ll stay with you,” she said.                                                   
“okay.”                                                                           
i did not tell her that i felt everything lay within my hands, but i have a       
feeling she knew and that for some reason she trusted me. i would not have,       
but that was her affair.                                                          
“you know how things might be,” i said.                                           
“i know,” she said, and i knew that she knew and that was it.                     
we turned our attention to other subjects, and later we slept.                    
she’d had a dream.                                                                
in the morning, she said to me, “i had a dream.”                                  
“what about?” i asked.                                                            
“the coming battle,” she told me. “i see you and the homed one locked             
in combat.”                                                                       
“who wins?”                                                                       
“i don’t know. but as you slept, i did a thing that might help you.”              
“i wish you had not,” i said. “i can take care of myself.”                        
“then i dreamed of my own death, in this time.”                                   
“let me take you away to a place i know.”                                         
“no, my place is here,” she told me.                                              
“i don’t pretend to own you,” i said, “but i can save you from whatever           
you’ve dreamed. that much lies within my power, believe me.”                      
“i do believe you, but i will not go.”                                            
“you’re a damned fool.”                                                           
“let me stay.”                                                                    
“as you wish… listen, i’ll even send you to cabra…”                               
“no.”                                                                             
“you’re a damned fool.”                                                           
“i know. i love you.”                                                             
“…and a stupid one. the word is ‘like.’ remember?”                                
“you’ll do it,” she said.                                                         
“go to hell,” i said.                                                             
then she wept, softly, until i comforted her once again.                          
that was lorraine.                                                                
                                                                     
chapter 3                                                                         
i thought back, one morning, upon all that had gone before. i thought of          
my brothers and sisters as though they were playing cards, which i knew           
was wrong. i thought back to the rest home where i had awakened, back to          
the battle for amber, back to my walking the pattern in rebma, and back to        
that time with moire, who just might be eric’s by now. i thought of bleys         
and of random, deirdre, caine, gerard, and eric, that morning. it was the         
morning of the battle, of course, and we were camped in the hills near the        
circle. we had been attacked several times along the way, but they had            
been brief, guerrilla affairs. we had dispatched our assailants and continued.    
when we reached the area we had decided upon, we made our camp, posted            
guards, and retired. we slept undisturbed. i awoke wondering whether my           
brothers and sisters thought of me as i thought of them. it was a very sad        
thought.                                                                          
in the privacy of a small grove, my helmet filled with soapy water, i             
shaved my beard. then i dressed, slowly, in my private and tattered colors.       
i was as hard as stone, dark as soil, and mean as hell once more.                 
today would be the day. i donned my visor, put on chain mail, buckled             
my belt, and hung grayswandir at my side. then i fastened my cloak at my          
neck with a silver rose and was discovered by a messenger who had been            
looking for me to tell me that things were about ready.                           
i kissed lorraine, who had insisted on coming along. then i mounted               
my horse, a roan named star, and rode off toward the front.                       
there i met with ganelon and with lance. they said, “we are ready.”               
i called for my officers and briefed them. they saluted, turned and rode          
away. “soon,” said lance, lighting his pipe.                                      
“how is your arm?”                                                                
“fine, now,” he replied, “after that workout you gave it yesterday.               
perfect.” i opened my visor and lit my own pipe.                                  
“you’ve shaved your beard,” said lance. “i cannot picture you without             
it.”                                                                              
“the helm fits better this way,” i said.                                          
“good fortune to us all,” said ganelon.                                           
“i know no gods, but if any care to be with us, i welcome them.”                  
“there is but one god,” said lance. “i pray that he be with us.”                  
“amen,” said ganelon, lighting his pipe. “for today.”                             
“it will be ours,” said lance.                                                    
“yes,” said i, as the sun stirred the east and the birds of morning the air,      
“it has that feel to it.” we emptied our pipes when we had finished and           
tucked them away at our belts. then we secured ourselves with final               
tightenings and claspings of our armor and ganelon said, “let us be about         
it.”                                                                              
my officers reported back to me. my sections were ready.                          
we filed down the hillside, and we assembled outside the circle.                  
nothing stirred within it, and no troops were visible.                            
“i wonder about corwin,” ganelon said to me.                                      
“he is with us,” i told him, and he looked at me strangely, seemed to             
notice the rose for the first time, then nodded brusquely.                        
“lance,” he said, when we had assembled. “give the order.”                        
and lance drew his blade. his cried “charge!” echoed about us.                    
we were half a mile inside the circle before anything happened. there             
were five hundred of us in the lead, all mounted. a dark cavalry appeared,        
and we met them. after five minutes, they broke and we rode on. then we           
heard the thunder.                                                                
there was lightning, and the rain began to fall.                                  
the thunderhead had finally broken.                                               
a thin line of foot soldiers, pikemen mainly, barred our way, waiting             
stoically. maybe we all smelled the trap, but we bore down upon them.             
then the cavalry hit our flanks.                                                  
we wheeled, and the fighting began in earnest. it was perhaps twenty              
minutes later… we held out, waiting for the main body to arrive. then the         
two hundred or so of us rode on…                                                  
men. it was men that we slew, that slew us—grayfaced, dour-                       
countenanced men. i wanted more. one more…                                        
theirs must have been a semi-metaphysical problem in logistics. how               
much could be diverted through this gateway? i was not sure. soon…                
we topped a rise, and far ahead and below us lay a dark citadel.                  
i raised my blade.                                                                
as we descended, they attacked.                                                   
they hissed and they croaked and they flapped. that meant, to me, that            
he was running low on people. grayswandir became a flame in my hand, a            
thunderbolt, a portable electric chair. i slew them as fast as they               
approached, and they burned as they died. to my right, i saw lance draw a         
similar line of chaos, and he was muttering beneath his breath. prayers for       
the dead, no doubt. to my left, ganelon laid about him, and a wake of fires       
followed behind his horse’s tail. through the flashing lightning, the citadel     
loomed larger.                                                                    
the hundred or so of us stormed ahead, and the abominations fell by the           
wayside.                                                                          
when we reached the gate, we were faced by an infantry of men and                 
beasts. we charged.                                                               
they outnumbered us, but we had little choice. perhaps we had                     
proceeded our own infantry by too much. but i thought not. time, as i saw         
it, was all important now.                                                        
“i’ve got to get through!” i cried. “he’s inside!”                                
“he’s mine!” said lance.                                                          
“you’re both welcome to him!” said ganelon, laying about him. “cross              
when you can! i’m with you!”                                                      
we slew and we slew and we slew, and then the tide turned in their                
favor. they pressed us, all the ugly things that were more or less than           
human, mixed in with human troops. we were drawn up into a tight knot,            
defending ourselves on all sides, when our bedraggled infantry arrived and        
began hacking. we pressed for the gate once more and made it this time, all       
forty or fifty of us.                                                             
we won through, and then there were troops in the courtyard to be slain.          
the dozen or so of us who made it to the foot of the dark tower were              
faced by a final guard contingent.                                                
“go it!” cried ganelon, as we leaped from our horses and waded into               
them.                                                                             
“go it!” cried lance, and i guess they both meant me, or each other.              
i took it to mean me, and i broke away from the fray and raced up the             
stairs.                                                                           
he would be there, in the highest tower, i knew; and i would have to              
face him, and face him down. i did not know whether i could, but i had to         
try, because i was the only one who knew where he really came from—and            
i was the one who put him there.                                                  
i came to a heavy wooden door at the top of the stairs. i tried it, but it        
was secured from the other side. so i kicked it as hard as i could. it fell       
inward with a crash.                                                              
i saw him there by the window, a man-formed body dressed in light                 
armor, goat head upon those massive shoulders.                                    
i crossed the threshold and stopped.                                              
he had turned to stare as the door had fallen, and now he sought my               
eyes through steel.                                                               
“mortal man, you have come too far,” he said. “or are you mortal                  
man?” and there was a blade in his hand.                                          
“ask strygalldwir,” i said.                                                       
“you are the one who slew him,” he stated. “did he name you?”                     
“maybe.”                                                                          
there were footsteps on the stairs behind me. i stepped to the left of the        
doorway.                                                                          
ganelon burst into the chamber and i called “halt!” and he did.                   
he turned to me.                                                                  
“this is the thing,” he said. “what is it?”                                       
“my sin against a thing i loved,” i said. “stay away from it. it’s mine.”         
“you’re welcome to it.” he stood stock still.                                     
“did you really mean that?” asked the creature.                                   
“find out,” i said, and leaped forward.                                           
but it did not fence with me. instead, it did what any mortal fencer              
would consider foolish.                                                           
it hurled its blade at me, point forward, like a thunderbolt. and the             
sound of its passage came like a clap of thunder. the elements outside the        
tower echoed it, a deafening response.                                            
with grayswandir, i parried that blade as though it were an ordinary              
thrust. it embedded itself in the floor and burst into flames. without, the       
lightning responded.                                                              
for an instant, the light was as blinding as a magnesium flare, and in            
that moment the creature was upon me.                                             
it pinned my arms to my sides, and its horns struck against my visor,             
once, twice…                                                                      
then i threw my strength against those arms, and their grip began to              
weaken.                                                                           
i dropped grayswandir, and with a final heave broke the hold it had               
upon me.                                                                          
in that moment, however, our eyes met.                                            
then we both struck, and we both reeled back.                                     
“lord of amber,” it said then, “why do you strive with me? it was you             
who gave us this passage, this way…”                                              
“i regret a rash act and seek to undo it.”                                        
“too late—and this a strange place to begin.” it struck again, so quickly         
that it got through my guard. i was slammed back against the wall. its speed      
was deadly.                                                                       
and then it raised its hand and made a sign, and i had a vision of the            
courts of chaos come upon me—a vision that made my hackles rise, made             
a chill wind blow across my soul, to know what i had done.                        
“you see?” it was saying. “you gave us this gateway. help us now, and             
we will restore to you that which is yours.”                                      
for a moment i was swayed. it was possible that it could do just what it          
had offered, if i would help.                                                     
but it would be a threat forever after. allies briefly, we would be at each       
other’s throats after we got what we wanted—and those dark forces would           
be much stronger by then. still, if i held the city…                              
“do we have a bargain?” came the sharp, near-bleat of the question.               
i thought upon the shadows, and of the places beyond shadow…                      
slowly, i reached up and unbuckled my helm…                                       
then i hurled it, just as the creature seemed to relax. i think ganelon           
was moving forward by then.                                                       
i leaped across the chamber and drove it back against the wall.                   
“no!” i cried.                                                                    
its manlike hands found my throat at about the same instant mine                  
wrapped about its own.                                                            
i squeezed, with all my strength, and twisted. i guess it did the same.           
i heard something snap like a dry stick. i wondered whose neck had                
broken. mine sure hurt.                                                           
i opened my eyes and there was the sky. i was lying on my back on a               
blanket on the ground.                                                            
“i’m afraid he’s going to live,” said ganelon, and i turned my head,              
slowly, in the direction of his voice.                                            
he was seated on the edge of the blanket, sword across his knees.                 
lorraine was with him.                                                            
“how goes it?” i said.                                                            
“we’ve won,” he told me. “you’ve kept your promise. when you killed               
that thing, it was all over. the men fell senseless, the creatures burned.”       
“good.”                                                                           
“i have been sitting here wondering why i no longer hate you.”                    
“have you reached any conclusions?”                                               
“no, not really. maybe it’s because we’re a lot alike. i don’t know.” i           
smiled at lorraine.                                                               
“i’m glad you’re very poor when it comes to prophecy. the battle is               
over and you’re still alive.”                                                     
“the death has already begun,” she said, not returning my smile.                  
“what do you mean?”                                                               
“they still tell stories of how the lord corwin had my grandfather                
executed—drawn and quartered publicly—for leading one of the early                
uprisings against him.”                                                           
“that wasn’t me,” i said. “it was one of my shadows.”                             
but she shook her head and said, “corwin of amber, i am what i am,”               
and she rose and left me then.                                                    
“what was it?” asked ganelon, ignoring her departure. “what was the               
thing in the tower?”                                                              
“mine,” i said; “one of those things which was released when i laid my            
curse upon amber. i opened the way then for that which lies beyond                
shadow to enter the real world. the paths of least resistance are followed in     
these things, through the shadows to amber. here, the path was the circle.        
elsewhere, it might be some different thing. i have closed their way through      
this place now. you may rest easy here.”                                          
“that is why you came here?”                                                      
“no,” i said. “not really. i was but passing on the road to avalon when i         
came upon lance. i could not let him lie there, and after i took him to you i     
became involved in this piece of my handiwork.”                                   
“avalon? then you lied when you said it was destroyed?”                           
i shook my head.                                                                  
“not so. our avalon fell, but in shadow i may find its like once more.”           
“take me with you.”                                                               
“are you mad?”                                                                    
“no, i would look once again on the land of my birth, no matter what              
the peril.”                                                                       
“i do not go to dwell there,” i said, “but to arm for battle. in avalon           
there is a pink powder the jewelers use. i ignited a sample of it one time in     
amber. i go there only to obtain it and to build guns that i may lay siege to     
amber and gain the throne that is mine.”                                          
“what. of those things from beyond shadow you spoke of.”                          
“i will deal with them afterwards. should i lose this time, then they are         
eric’s problem.”                                                                  
“you said that he had blinded you and cast you into the dungeons.”                
“that is true. i grew new eyes. i escaped.”                                       
“you are a demon.”                                                                
“this has often been said. i no longer deny it.”                                  
“you will take me with you?”                                                      
“if you really wish to come. it will differ from the avalon you knew,             
however.”                                                                         
“to amber!”                                                                       
“you are mad!”                                                                    
“no. long have i wished to look upon that fabled city. after i have seen          
avalon once again i will want to turn my hand to something new. was i not         
a good general?”                                                                  
“yes.”                                                                            
“then you will teach me of these things you call guns, and i will help            
you in the greatest battle. i’ve not too many good years remaining before         
me, i know. take me with you.”                                                    
“your bones may bleach at the foot of kolvir, beside my own.”                     
“what battle is certain? i will chance it”                                        
“as you would. you may come.”                                                     
“thank you. lord.”                                                                
we camped there that night, rode back to the keep in the morning. then i          
sought after lorraine. i learned that she had run off with one other former       
lovers, an officer named melkin. although she had been upset, i resented          
the fact that she had not given me the opportunity to explain something of        
which she only knew rumors. i decided to follow them.                             
i mounted star, turned my stiff neck in the direction they had                    
supposedly taken, and rode on after. in a way, i could not blame her. i had       
not been received back at the keep as the slayer of the horned one might          
have been were he anyone else. the stories of their corwin lingered on, and       
the demon tag was on all of them. the men i had worked with, fought               
beside, now looked at me with glances holding something more than fear—           
glances only, for they quickly dropped their eyes or turned them to another       
thing. perhaps they feared that i wished to stay and reign over them. they        
might have been relieved, all save ganelon, when i took to the trail.             
ganelon, i think, feared that i would not return for him as i had promised.       
this, i feel, is the reason that he offered to ride with me. but it was a thing   
that i had to do by myself.                                                       
lorraine had come to mean something to me, i was surprised to                     
discover, and i found myself quite hurt by her action. i felt that she owed       
me a hearing before she went her way. then if she still chose her mortal          
captain, they could have my blessing. if not, i realized that i wanted to keep    
her with me. fair avalon would be postponed for so long as it took me to          
resolve this to ending or continuance.                                            
i rode along the trail and the birds sang in the trees about me. the day          
was bright with a sky-blue, tree-green peace, for the scourge had been lifted     
from the land. in my heart, there was something like a bit of joy that i had      
undone at least a small portion of the rottenness i had wrought. evil? hell,      
i’ve done more of it than most men, but i had picked up a conscience too,         
somewhere along the way, and i let it enjoy one of its rare moments of            
satisfaction. once i held amber, i could allow it a little more leeway, i felt.   
ha!                                                                               
i was heading north, and the terrain was foreign to me. i followed a              
clearly marked trail, which bore the signs of two riders‘ recent passage. i       
followed all that day, through dusk and into evening, dismounting                 
periodically to inspect the way. finally, my eyes played too many tricks on       
me, so i located a small glen- several hundred yards to the left of the trail-    
and there i camped for the night. it was the pains in my neck, doubtless,         
that made me dream of the horned one and relive that battle. “help us now,        
and we will restore to you that which is yours,” it said. i awoke suddenly at     
that point, with a curse on my lips.                                              
when morning paled the sky, i mounted and continued on. it had been a             
cold night, and the day still held me in hands out of the north. the grasses      
sparkled with a light frost and my cloak was damp from having been used           
as a bedroll.                                                                     
by noon, something of warmth had returned to the world and the trail              
was fresher. i was gaining on them.                                               
when i found her, i leaped down from my mount and ran to where she                
lay, beneath a wild rosebush without flowers, the thorns of which had             
scratched her cheek and shoulder. dead, she had not been so for long, for         
the blood was still damp upon her breast where the blade had entered, and         
her flesh yet warm.                                                               
there were no rocks with which to build her a cairn, so i cut away the            
sod with grayswandir and laid her there to rest he had removed her                
bracelets, her rings, and her jeweled combs, which had held all she               
possessed of fortune. i had to close her eyes before i covered her over with      
my cloak, and here my hand faltered and my own eyes grew dim. it took me          
a long while.                                                                     
i rode on, and it was not long before i overtook him, riding as though he         
were pursued by the devil, which he was. i spoke not a word when i                
unhorsed him, nor afterward, and i did not use my blade, though he drew           
his own. i hurled his broken body into a high oak tree, and when i looked         
back it was dark with birds.                                                      
i replaced her rings, her bracelets, her combs, before i closed the grave,        
and that was lorraine. all that she had ever been or wanted to be had come        
to this, and that is the whole story of how we met and how we parted,             
lorraine and i, in the land called lorraine, and it is like onto my life, i       
guess, for a prince of amber is part and party to all the rottenness that is in   
the world, which is why whenever i do speak of my conscience, something           
else within me must answer, “ha!” in the mirrors of the many judgments,           
my hands are the color of blood. i am a part of the evil that exists in the       
world and in shadow. i sometime fancy myself an evil which exists to              
oppose other evils. i destroy melkins when i find them, and on that great         
day of which prophets speak but in which they do not truly believe, on that       
day when the world is completely cleansed of evil, then i, too, will go down      
into darkness, swallowing curses. perhaps even sooner than that, i now            
judge. but whatever… until that time, i shall not wash my hands nor let           
them hang useless.                                                                
turning, i rode back to the keep of ganelon, who knew but would                   
never understand.                                                                 
                                                                     
chapter 4                                                                         
riding, riding, through the wild, weird ways that led to avalon, we went,         
ganelon and i, down alleys of dream and of nightmare, beneath the brass           
bark of the sun and the hot, white isles of night, till these were gold and       
diamond chips and the moon swam like a swan. day belled forth the green           
of spring, we crossed a mighty river and the mountains before as were             
frosted by night. i unleashed an arrow of my desire into the midnight and it      
took fire overhead, burned its way like a meteor into the north. the only         
dragon we encountered was lame and limped away quickly to hide,                   
singeing daisies as it panted and wheezed. migrations of bright birds             
arrowed our destination, and crystalline voices from lakes echoed our words       
as we passed. i sang as we rode, and after a time, ganelon joined me. we          
had been traveling for over a week, and the land and the sky and the breezes      
told me we were near to avalon now.                                               
we camped in a wood near a lake as the sun slid behind stone and the              
day died down and ceased. i went off to the lake to bathe while ganelon           
unpacked our gear. the water was cold and bracing. i splashed about in it         
for a long while.                                                                 
i thought i heard several cries as i bathed, but i could not be certain. it       
was a weird wood and i was not overly concerned. however, i dressed               
quickly and hurried back to the camp.                                             
as i walked, i heard it again: a whine, a plea. drawing nearer, i realized        
that a conversation was in progress.                                              
then i entered the small clearing we had chosen. our gear was spread              
about and the beginnings of a campfire had been laid.                             
ganelon squatted on his haunches beneath an oak tree. the man hung                
from it.                                                                          
he was young and fair of hair and complexion. beyond that, it was hard            
to say at a glance. it is difficult, i discovered, to obtain a clear initial      
impression as to a man’s features and size when he is hanging upside down         
several feet above the ground.                                                    
his hands had been tied behind his back and he hung from a low bough              
by a rope that had been knotted about his right ankle.                            
he was talking—brief, rapid phrases in response to ganelon’s questions            
—and his face was moist with spittle and sweat. he did not hang limply, but       
swung back and forth. there was an abrasion on his cheek and several spots        
of blood on his shirt front.                                                      
halting, i restrained myself from interrupting for a moment and                   
watched. ganelon would not have put him where he was without a reason,            
so i was not immediately overwhelmed with sympathy for the fellow.                
whatever it was that had prompted ganelon to question him thus, i knew            
that i, too, would be interested in the information. i was also interested in     
whatever the session would show me concerning ganelon, who was now                
something of an ally. and a few more minutes upside down could not do             
that much additional damage…                                                      
as his body slowed, ganelon prodded him in the sternum with the tip of            
his blade and set him to swinging violently once again. this broke the skin       
lightly and another red spot appeared. at this, the boy cried out. from his       
complexion, i could see now that he was a youth. ganelon extended his             
blade and held its point several inches beyond the place the boy’s throat         
would come to on the backswing. at the last moment, he snatched it back           
and chuckled as the boy writhed and cried out, “please!”                          
“the rest,” said ganelon. “tell me everything.”                                   
“that’s all!” said the other. “i know no more!”                                   
“why not?”                                                                        
“they swept on by me then! i could not see!”                                      
“why did you not follow?”                                                         
“they were mounted. i was on foot.”                                               
“why did you not follow on foot then?”                                            
“i was dazed.”                                                                    
“dazed? you were afraid! you deserted!”                                           
“no!”                                                                             
ganelon held his blade forth, snapped it away again at the final                  
moment.                                                                           
“no!” cried the youth.                                                            
ganelon moved the blade again.                                                    
“yes!” the boy screamed. “i was afraid!”                                          
“and you fled then?”                                                              
“yes! i kept running! i’ve been fleeing ever since…”                              
“and you know nothing of how things went after that?”                             
“no.”                                                                             
“you lie!” he moved the blade again.                                              
“no!” said the boy. “please…”                                                     
i stepped forward then. “ganelon,” i said.                                        
he glanced at me and grinned, lowering the blade. the boy sought my               
eyes.                                                                             
“what have we here?” i asked.                                                     
“ha!” he said, slapping the inside of the youth’s thigh so that he cried          
out. “a thief, a deserter—with an interesting tale to tell.”                      
“then cut him down and let me hear it,” i said.                                   
ganelon turned and cut through the cord with one swipe of his blade.              
the boy fell to the ground and began sobbing.                                     
“i caught him trying to steal our supplies and thought to question him            
about the area,” ganelon said. “he’s come from avalon—quickly.”                   
“what do you mean?”                                                               
“he was a foot soldier in a battle that took place there two nights ago.          
he turned coward during the fighting and deserted.”                               
the youth began to mouth a denial and ganelon kicked him.                         
“silence!” he said. “i’m telling it now—as you told me!”                          
the boy moved sideways like a crab and looked at me with wide,                    
pleading eyes.                                                                    
“battle? who was fighting?” i asked. ganelon smiled grimly.                       
“it sounds somewhat familiar,” he said. “the forces of avalon were                
engaged in what seems to have been the largest—and perhaps final—of a             
long series of confrontations with beings not quite natural.”                     
“oh?”                                                                             
i studied the boy and his eyes dropped, but i saw the fear that was there         
before they fell.                                                                 
“…women,” ganelon said. “pale furies out of some hell, lovely and                 
cold. armed and armored. long, light hair. eyes like ice. mounted on              
white, fire-breathing steeds that fed on human flesh, they came forth by          
night from a warren of caves in the mountains an earthquake opened several        
years ago. they raided, taking young men back with them as captives,              
killing all others. many appeared later as a soulless infantry, following their   
van. this sounds very like the men of the circle we knew.”                        
“but many of those lived when they were freed,” i said. “they did not             
seem soulless then, only somewhat as i once did—amnesiac. it seems                
strange,” i went on, “that they did not block off these caves during the day,     
since the riders only came forth by night…”                                       
“the deserter tells me this was tried,” said ganelon, “and they always            
burst forth after a time, stronger than before.”                                  
the boy was ashen, but he nodded when i looked toward him                         
inquiringly.                                                                      
“their general, whom he calls the protector, routed them many times,”             
ganelon continued. “he even spent part of a night with their leader, a pale       
bitch named lintra—whether in dalliance or parlay, i’m not certain. but           
nothing came of this. the raids continued and her forces grew stronger. the       
protector finally decided to mass an all-out attack, in hopes of destroying       
them utterly. it was during that battle that this one fled,” he said, indicating  
the youth with a gesture of his blade, “which is why we do not know the           
ending to the story.”                                                             
“is that the way it was?” i asked him.                                            
the boy looked away from the weapon’s point, met my eyes for a                    
moment, then nodded slowly.                                                       
“interesting,” i said to ganelon. “very. i’ve a feeling their problem is          
linked to the one we just solved. i wish i knew how their fight turned out”       
ganelon nodded, shifted his grip on his weapon. “well, if we’re finished          
with him now…” he said.                                                           
“hold. i presume he was trying to steal something to eat?”                        
“yes.”                                                                            
“free his hands. well feed him.”                                                  
“but he tried to steal from us.”                                                  
“did you not say that you had once killed a man for a pair of shoes?”             
“yes, but that was different”                                                     
“how so?”                                                                         
“i got away with it.”                                                             
i laughed. it broke me up completely, and i could not stop laughing. he           
looked irritated, then puzzled. then he began laughing himself.                   
the youth regarded us as if we were a pair of maniacs.                            
“all right,” said ganelon finally, “all right,” and he stooped, turned the        
boy with a single push, and severed the cord that bound his wrists.               
“come, lad,” he said. “i’ll fetch you something to eat,” and he moved to          
our gear and opened several food parcels.                                         
the boy rose and limped slowly after him. he seized the food that was             
offered and began eating quickly and noisily, not taking his eyes off             
ganelon. his information, if true, presented me with several complications,       
the foremost being that it would probably be more difficult to obtain what i      
wanted in a war-ravaged land. it also lent weight to my fears as to the           
nature and extent of the disruption pattern.                                      
i helped ganelon build a small fire.                                              
“how does this affect our plans?” he asked.                                       
i saw no real choice. all of the shadows near to what i desired would be          
similarly involved. i could lay my course for one which did not possess           
such involvement, but in reaching it i would have achieved the wrong              
place. that which i desired would not be available there. if the forays of        
chaos kept occurring on my desire-walk through shadow, then they were             
bound up with the nature of the desire and would have to be dealt with, one       
way or another, sooner or later. they could not be avoided. such was the          
nature of the game, and i could not complain because i had laid down the          
rules.                                                                            
“we go on,” i said. “it is the place of my desire.”                               
the youth let out a brief cry, and then-perhaps from some feeling of              
indebtedness for my having prevented ganelon from poking holes in him-            
warned, “do not go to avalon, sir! there is nothing there that you could          
desire! you will be slain!”                                                       
i smiled to him and thanked him. ganelon chuckled then and said, “let             
us take him back with us to stand a deserter’s trial.”                            
at this, the youth scrambled to his feet and began running.                       
still laughing, ganelon drew his dagger and cocked his arm to throw it.           
i struck his arm and his cast went wide of its mark. the youth vanished           
within the wood and ganelon continued to laugh.                                   
he retrieved the dagger from where it had fallen and said, “you should            
have let me kill him, you know.”                                                  
“i decided against it.” he shrugged.                                              
“if he returns and cuts our throats tonight you may find yourself feeling         
somewhat different.”                                                              
“i should imagine. but he will not, you know that.”                               
he shrugged again, skewering a piece of meat and warming it over the              
flames.                                                                           
“well, war has taught him to show a good pair of heels,” he                       
acknowledged. “perhaps we will awaken in the morning.”                            
he took a bite and began to chew. it seemed like a good idea and i                
fetched some for myself.                                                          
much later, i was awakened from a troubled sleep to stare at stars                
through a screen of leaves. some omen making portion of my mind had               
seized upon the youth and used us both badly. it was a long while before i        
could get back to sleep.                                                          
in the morning we kicked dirt over the ashes and rode on. we made it into         
the mountains that afternoon and passed through them the following day.           
there were occasional signs of recent passage on the trail we followed, but       
we encountered no one.                                                            
the following day we passed several farmhouses and cottages, not                  
pausing at any of them. i had opted against the wild, demonic route i had         
followed when i had exiled ganelon. while quite brief, i knew that he             
would have found it massively disconcerting. i had wanted this time to            
think, so such a journeying was not called for. now, however, the long route      
was nearing its end. we achieved amber’s sky that afternoon, and i                
admired it in silence. it might almost be the forest of arden through which       
we rode. there were no horn notes, however, no julian, no morgenstern, no         
stormhounds to harry us, as there had been in arden when last i passed that       
way. there were only the bird notes in the great-boled trees, the complaint       
of a squirrel, the bark of a fox, the plash of a waterfall, the whites and blues  
and pinks of flowers in the shade.                                                
the breezes of the afternoon were gentle and cool; they lulled me so              
that i was unprepared for the row of fresh graves beside the trail that came      
into sight when we rounded a bend. near by, there was a torn and trampled         
glen. we tarried there briefly but learned nothing more than had been             
immediately apparent.                                                             
we passed another such place farther along, and several fire-charred              
groves. the trail was well worn by then and the side brush trampled and           
broken, as by the passage of many men and beasts. the smell of ashes was          
occasionally upon the air, and we hurried past the partly eaten carcass of a      
horse now well ripened where it lay.                                              
the sky of amber no longer heartened me, though the way was clear                 
for a long while after that.                                                      
the day was running to evening and the forest had thinned considerably            
when ganelon noted the smoke trails to the southeast. we took the first side      
path that seemed to lead in that direction, although it was tangent to avalon     
proper. it was difficult to estimate the distance, but we could tell that we      
would not reach the place until after nightfall.                                  
“their army—still encamped?” ganelon wondered.                                    
“or that of their conqueror.”                                                     
he shook his bead and loosened his blade in its scabbard.                         
toward twilight, i left the trail to follow a sound of running water to its       
source. it was a clear, clean stream that had made its way down from the          
mountains and still bore something of their chill within it. i bathed there,      
trimming my new bearding and cleaning the dust of travel from my                  
garments as well. as we were nearing this end of our journeying, it was my        
wish to arrive with what small splendor i could muster. appreciating this,        
ganelon even splashed water over his face and blew his nose loudly.               
standing on the bank, blinking my rinsed eyes at the heavens, i saw the           
moon resolve itself sharp and clear, the fuzziness fading from its edges.         
this was the first time it had happened. my breathing jerked to a halt and i      
kept staring. then i scanned the sky for early stars, traced the edges of         
clouds, the distant mountains, the farthest trees. i looked back at the moon,     
and it still held clear and steady. my eyesight was normal once again.            
ganelon drew back at the sound of my laughter, and he never inquired              
as to its cause.                                                                  
suppressing an impulse to sing, i remounted and headed back toward                
the trail once again. the shadows deepened as we rode, and clusters of stars      
bloomed among the branches overhead. i inhaled a big piece of the night,          
held it a moment, released it. i was myself once again and the feeling was        
good.                                                                             
ganelon drew up beside me and said in a low voice, “there will                    
doubtless be sentries.”                                                           
“yes,” i said.                                                                    
“then hadn’t we better leave the trail?”                                          
“no. i would rather not seem furtive. it matters not to me whether we             
arrive with an escort. we are simply two travelers.”                              
“they may require the reason for our travels.”                                    
“then let us be mercenaries who have heard of strife in the realm and             
come seeking employment”                                                          
“yes. we look the part. let us hope they pause long enough to notice.”            
“if they cannot see us that well, then we are poor targets.”                      
“true, but i am not fully comforted by the thought.”                              
i listened to the sounds of the horses‘ hoofs on the trail. the way was           
not straight. it twisted, curved, and wandered for a time, then took an           
upward turn. as we mounted the rise it followed, the trees thinned even           
more.                                                                             
we came to the top of a hill then, and into a fairly open area.                   
advancing, we achieved a sudden view that covered several miles. we               
drew rein at an abrupt drop that curved its way into a gradual slope after ten    
or fifteen precipitous meters, sweeping downward to a large plain perhaps a       
mile distant, then continuing on through a hilly, sporadically wooded area.       
the plain was dotted with campfires and there were a few tents toward the         
center of things. a large number of horses grazed near by, and i guessed          
there were several hundred men sitting beside the fires or moving about the       
compound. ganelon sighed.                                                         
“at least they seem to be normal men,” he said.                                   
“yes.”                                                                            
“…and if they are normal military men, we are probably being watched              
right now. this is too good a vantage to leave unposted.”                         
“yes.”                                                                            
there came a noise from behind us. we began to turn, just as a near by            
voice said, “don’t move!” i continued to turn my head, and i saw four men.        
two of them held crossbows trained on us and the other two had blades in          
their hands. one of these advanced two paces.                                     
“dismount!” he ordered. “on this side! slowly!” we climbed down                   
from our mounts and faced him, keeping our hands away from our                    
weapons. “who are you? where are you from?” he asked.                             
“we are mercenaries,” i replied, “from lorraine. we heard there was               
fighting here, and we are seeking employment. we were headed for that             
camp below. it is yours, i hope?”                                                 
“…and if i said no, that we are a patrol for a force about to invade that         
camp?”                                                                            
i shrugged. “in that case, is your side interested in hiring a couple of          
men?”                                                                             
he spat. “the protector has no need for your sort,” he said. then,                
“from what direction do you ride?”                                                
“east,” i said.                                                                   
“did you meet with any difficulty recently?”                                      
“no,” i said. “should we have?”                                                   
“hard to say,” he decided. “remove your weapons. i’m going to send                
you down to the camp. they will want to question you about anything you           
may have seen in the east—anything unusual.”                                      
“we’ve seen nothing unusual,” i said.                                             
“whatever, they will probably feed you. though i doubt you will be                
hired. you have come a bit late for the fighting. remove your weapons             
now.”                                                                             
he called two more men from within the trees while we unbuckled our               
sword belts. he instructed them to escort us below, on foot. we were to lead      
our horses. the men took our weapons, and as we turned to go our                  
interrogator cried out, “wait!” i turned back toward him.                         
“you. what is your name?” he asked me.                                            
“corey” i said.                                                                   
“stand still.”                                                                    
he approached, drawing very near. he stared at me for perhaps ten                 
seconds.                                                                          
“what is the matter?” i asked.                                                    
instead of replying, he fumbled with a pouch at his belt. he withdrew a           
handful of coins and held them close to his eyes.                                 
“damn! it’s too dark,” he said, “and we can’t make a light.”                      
“for what?” i said.                                                               
“oh, it is not of any great importance,” he told me. “you struck me as            
familiar, though, and i was trying to think why. you look like the head           
stamped on some of our old coins. a few of them are still about.                  
“doesn’t he?” he addressed the nearest bowman.                                    
the man lowered his crossbow and advanced. he squinted at me from a               
few paces‘ distance.                                                              
“yes,” he said then, “he does.”                                                   
“what was it—the one we’re thinking of?”                                          
“one of those old men. before my time. i don’t remember.”                         
“me neither. well…” he shrugged. “no importance. go ahead, corey.                 
answer their questions honestly and you’ll not be harmed.”                        
i turned away and left him there in the moonlight, gazing after me and            
scratching the top of his head.                                                   
the men who guarded us were not the talkative sort. which was just as             
well.                                                                             
all the way down the hill i wondered about the boy’s story and the                
resolution of the conflict he had described, for i had achieved the physical      
analogue of the world of my desire and would now have to operate within           
the prevailing situations.                                                        
the camp had the pleasant smell of man and beast, wood smoke,                     
roasting meat, leather and oil, all intermingled in the firelight where men       
talked, honed weapons, repaired gear, ate, gamed, slept, drank, and watched       
us as we led our mounts through their midst, escorted in the direction of a       
nearly central trio of tattered tents. a sphere of silence expanded about us      
as we went.                                                                       
we were halted before the second-largest tent and one of our guards               
spoke with a man who was pacing the area. the man shook his head several          
times and gestured in the direction of the largest tent. the exchange lasted      
for several minutes, then our guard returned and spoke with the other guard       
who waited at our left. finally, our man nodded and approached me while           
the other summoned a man from the nearest campfire.                               
“the officers are all at a meeting in the protector’s tent,” he said. “we         
are going to hobble your horses and put them to graze. unstrap your things        
and set them here. you will have to wait to see the captain.” i nodded, and       
we set about unstowing our belongings and rubbing the horses down. i              
patted star on the neck and watched a small man with a limp lead him and          
ganelon’s mount firedrake off toward the other horses. we sat on our packs        
then and waited. one of the guards brought us some hot tea and accepted a         
pipeful of my tobacco. they moved then to a spot somewhat to our rear.            
i watched the big tent, sipped my tea, and thought of amber and a small           
night club in the rue de char et pain in brussels, on the shadow earth i          
had so long inhabited. once i obtained the jewelers rouge i needed from           
here, i would be heading for brussels to deal with the arms merchants of the      
gun bourse once again. my order would be complicated and expensive, i             
realized, because some ammunition manufacturer would have to be                   
persuaded to set up a special production line. i knew dealers on that earth       
other than interarmco, thanks to my itinerant military background in that         
place, and i estimated that it would only take me a few months to get             
outfitted there. i began considering the details and time passed quickly and      
pleasantly.                                                                       
after what was probably an hour and a half, the shadows stirred within            
the large tent. it was several minutes after that before the entrance flap was    
thrown aside and men began to emerge, slowly, talking among themselves,           
glancing back within. the last two tarried at the threshold, still talking with   
someone who remained inside. the rest of them passed into the other tents.        
the two at the entrance edged their way outside, still facing the interior.       
i could hear the sounds of their voices, although i could not make out what       
was being said. as they drifted farther outside, the man with whom they           
were speaking moved also and i caught a glimpse of him. the light was at          
his back and the two officers blocked most of my view, but i could see that       
he was thin and very tall.                                                        
our guards had not yet stirred, indicating to me that one of the two              
officers was the captain mentioned earlier. i continued to stare, willing them    
to move farther and grant me a better look at their superior.                     
after a time they did, and a few moments later he took a step forward.            
at first, i could not tell whether it was just a play of light and shadow…        
but no! he moved again and i had a clear view for a moment. he was                
missing his right arm, from a point just below the elbow. it was so heavily       
bandaged that i guessed the loss to have been quite recent.                       
then his large left hand made a downward, sweeping gesture and                    
hovered a good distance out from his body. the stump twitched at the same         
moment, and so did something at the back of my mind. his hair was long            
and straight and brown, and i saw the way that his jaw jutted…                    
he stepped outside then, and a breeze caught the cloak he wore and                
caused it to flare to his right. i saw that his shirt was yellow, his trousers    
brown. the cloak itself was a flame-like orange, and he caught its edge with      
an unnaturally rapid movement of his left hand and drew it back to cover          
his stump.                                                                        
i stood quickly, and his head snapped in my direction.                            
our gazes met, and neither of us moved for several heartbeats after that.         
the two officers turned and stared, and then he pushed them aside and             
was striding toward me. i heard ganelon grunt and climb quickly to his            
feet. our guards were taken by surprise, also.                                    
he halted several paces before me and his hazel eyes swept over me. he            
seldom smiled, but he managed a faint one this time.                              
“come with me,” he said, and he turned back toward his tent.                      
we followed him, leaving our gear where it lay.                                   
he dismissed the two officers with a glance, halted beside the tent’s             
entrance and motioned us in. he followed and let the flap fall behind him.        
my eyes took in his bedroll, a small table, benches, weapons, a campaign          
chest. there was an oil lamp on the table, as well as books, maps, a bottle,      
and some cups. another lamp flickered atop the chest.                             
he clasped my hand and smiled again. “corwin,” he said, “and still                
alive.”                                                                           
“benedict,” i said, smiling myself, “and breathing yet. it has been               
devilish long.”                                                                   
“indeed. who is your friend?”                                                     
“his name is ganelon.”                                                            
“ganelon,” he said, nodding toward him but not offering to clasp hands.           
he moved to the table then and poured three cups of wine. he passed               
one to me, another to ganelon, raised the third himself.                          
“to your health, brother,” he said.                                               
“to yours.” we drank.                                                             
then, “be seated,” he said, gesturing toward the nearest bench and                
seating himself at the table, “and welcome to avalon.”                            
“thank you—protector.” he grimaced.                                               
“the sobriquet is not unearned,” he said flatly, continuing to study my           
face. “i wonder whether their earlier protector could say the same?”              
“it was not really this place,” i said, “and i believe that he could.” he         
shrugged.                                                                         
“of course,” he said. “enough of that! where have you been? what                  
have you been doing? why have you come here? tell me of yourself. it has          
been too long.”                                                                   
i nodded. it was unfortunate, but family etiquette as well as the balance         
of power required that i answer his questions before asking any of my own.        
he was my elder, and i had—albeit unknowing—intruded in his sphere of             
influence. it was not that i begrudged him the courtesy. he was one of the        
few among my many relatives whom i respected and even liked. it was that          
i was itching to question him. it had been, as he had said, too long.             
and how much should i tell him now? i had no notion where his                     
sympathies might lie. i did not desire to discover the reasons for his self-      
imposed exile from amber by mentioning the wrong things. i would have             
to begin with something fairly neutral and sound him out as i went along.         
“there must be a beginning,” he said then. “i care not what face you put          
upon it.”                                                                         
“there are many beginnings,” i said. “it is difficult… i suppose i should         
go all the way back and take it from there.” i took another sip of the wine.      
“yes,” i decided. “that seems simplest—though it was only                         
comparatively recently that i recalled much of what had occurred.”                
“it was several years after the defeat of the moonriders out of ghenesh           
and your departure that eric and i had a major falling out,” i began. “yes, it    
was a quarrel over the succession. dad had been making abdication noises          
again, and he still refused to name a successor. naturally, the old arguments     
were resumed as to who was more legitimate. of course, you and eric are           
both my elders, but while faiella, mother to eric and myself, was his wife        
after the death of clymnea, they—”                                                
“enough!” cried benedict, slapping the table so hard that it cracked.             
the lamp danced and sputtered, but by some small miracle was not                  
upset. the tent’s entrance flap was immediately pushed aside and a                
concerned guard peered in. benedict glanced at him and he withdrew.               
“i do not wish to sit in on our respective bastardy proceeding,” benedict         
said softly. “that obscene pastime was one of the reasons i initially             
absented myself from felicity. please continue your story without the             
benefit of footnotes.”                                                            
“well—yes,” i said, coughing lightly. “as i was saying, we had some               
rather bitter arguments concerning the whole matter. then one evening it          
went beyond mere words. we fought.”                                               
“a duel?”                                                                         
“nothing that formal. a simultaneous decision to murder one another is            
more like it. at any rate, we fought for a long while and eric finally got the    
upper hand and proceeded to pulverize me. at the risk of getting ahead of         
my story, i have to add that all of this was only recalled to me about five       
years ago.” benedict nodded, as though he understood.                             
“i can only conjecture as to what occurred immediately after i lost               
consciousness,” i went on. “but eric stopped short of killing me himself.         
when i awakened, i was on a shadow earth in a place called london. the            
plague was rampant at the time, and i had contracted it. i recovered with no      
memory of anything prior to london. i dwelled on that shadow world for            
centuries, seeking some clue as to my identity. i traveled all over it, often as  
part of some military campaign. i attended their universities, i spoke with       
some of their wisest men, i consulted famous physicians. but nowhere              
could i find the key to my past. it was obvious to me that i was not like         
other men and i took great pains to conceal this fact. i was furious because i    
could have anything that i wanted except what i wanted most—my own                
identity, my memories.                                                            
“the years passed, but this anger and this longing did not. it took an            
accident that fractured my skull to set off the changes that led to the return    
of my first recollections. this was approximately five years ago, and the         
irony of it is that i have good reason to believe eric was responsible for the    
accident. flora had apparently been resident on that shadow earth all along,      
keeping watch over me.                                                            
“to return to conjecture, eric must have stayed his hand at the last              
moment, desiring my death, but not wanting it traceable to him. so he             
transported me through shadow to a place of sudden, almost certain death          
—doubtless to return and say that we had argued and i had ridden off in a         
huff, muttering something about going away again. we had been hunting in          
the forest of arden that day—just the two of us, together.”                       
“i find it strange,” benedict interrupted, “that two rivals such as               
yourselves should elect to hunt together under such circumstances.”               
i took a sip of wine and smiled.                                                  
“perhaps it was a trifle more contrived than i made it sound,” i said.            
“perhaps we both welcomed the opportunity to hunt together. just the two          
of us.”                                                                           
“i see,” he said. “so it is possible that your situations could have been         
reversed?”                                                                        
“well,” i said, “that is difficult to say. i do not believe i would have          
gone that far. i am talking as of now, of course. people do change, you           
know. back then…? yes, i might have done the same thing to him. i cannot          
say for certain, but it is possible.” he nodded again, and i felt a flash of      
anger which passed quickly into amusement.                                        
“fortunately, i am not out to justify my own motives for anything,” i             
continued. “to go on with my guesswork, i believe that eric kept tabs on          
me after that, doubtless disappointed at first that i had survived, but           
satisfied as to my harmlessness. so he arranged to have flora keep an eye         
on me, and the world turned peacefully for a long while. then, presumably,        
dad abdicated and disappeared without the question of the succession              
having been settled—”                                                             
“the hell he did!” said benedict. “there was no abdication. he just               
vanished. one morning he simply was not in his chambers. his bed had not          
even been slept in. there were no messages. he had been seen entering the         
suite the evening before, but no one saw him depart. and even this was not        
considered strange for a long while. at first it was simply thought that he       
was sojourning in shadow once again, perhaps to seek another bride. it was        
a long while before anyone dared suspect foul play or chose to construe this      
as a novel form of abdication.”                                                   
“i was not aware of this,” i said. “your sources of information seem to           
have been closer to the heart of things than mine were.”                          
he only nodded, giving rise to uneasy speculations on my part as to his           
contact in amber. for all i knew, he could be pro-eric these days.                
“when was the last time you were back there yourself?” i ventured.                
“a little over twenty years ago,” he replied, “but i keep in touch.”              
not with anyone who had cared to mention it to me! he must have                   
known that as he said it, so did he mean me to take it as a caution—or a          
threat? my mind raced. of course he possessed a set of the major trumps. i        
fanned them mentally and went through them like mad. random had                   
professed ignorance as to his whereabouts. brand had been missing a long          
while. i had had indication that he was still alive, imprisoned in some           
unpleasant place or other and in no position to report on the happenings in       
amber. flora could not have been his contact, as she had been in virtual          
exile in shadow herself until recently. llewella was in rebma. deirdre was        
in rebma also, and had been out of favor in amber when last i saw her.            
fiona? julian had told me she was “somewhere to the south.” he was                
uncertain as to precisely where. who did that leave?                              
eric himself, julian, gerard, or caine, as i saw it. scratch eric. he             
would not have passed along the details of dad’s non-abdication in a              
manner that would allow things to be taken as benedict had taken them.            
julian supported eric, but was not without personal ambitions of the highest      
order. he would pass along information if it might benefit him to do so.          
ditto for caine. gerard, on the other hand, had always struck me as more          
interested in the welfare of amber itself than in the question of who sat on      
its throne. he was not over-fond of eric, though, and had once been willing       
to support either bleys or myself over him. i believed he would have              
considered benedict’s awareness of events to be something in the nature of        
an insurance policy for the realm. yes, it was almost certainly one of these      
three. julian hated me. caine neither liked nor disliked me especially, and       
gerard and i shared fond memories that went all the way back to my                
childhood.                                                                        
i would have to find out who it was, quickly—and he was not yet ready             
to tell me, of course, knowing nothing of my present motives. a liaison           
with amber could be used to hurt me or benefit me in short order,                 
depending upon his desire and the person on the other end. it was therefore       
both sword and shield to him, and i was somewhat hurt that he had chosen          
to display these accoutrements so quickly. i chose to take it that his recent     
injury had served to make him abnormally wary, for i had certainly never          
given him cause for distress. still, this caused me to feel abnormally wary       
also, a sad thing to know when meeting one’s brother again for the first time     
in many years.                                                                    
“it is interesting,” i said, swirling the wine within my cup. “in this light,     
then, it appears that everyone may have acted prematurely.”                       
“not everyone,” he said.                                                          
i felt my face redden.                                                            
“your, pardon,” i said.                                                           
he nodded curtly.                                                                 
“please continue your telling.”                                                   
“well, to continue my chain of assumptions,” i said, “when eric decided           
that the throne had been vacant long enough and the time had come to make         
his move, he must also have decided that my amnesia was not sufficient and        
that it would be better to see my claim quitted entirely. at this time, he        
arranged for me to have an accident off on that shadow earth, an accident         
which should have proven fatal but did not.”                                      
“how do you know this? how much of it is guesswork?”                              
“flora as much as admitted it to me—including her own complicity in               
the thing—when i questioned her later.”                                           
“very interesting. go on.”                                                        
“the bash on my head provided what even sigmoid freud had been                    
unable to obtain for me earlier,” i said. “there returned to me small             
recollections that grew stronger and stronger—especially after i                  
encountered flora and was exposed to all manner of things that stimulated         
my memory. i was able to convince her that it had fully returned, so her          
speech was open as to people and things. then random showed up, fleeing           
from something—”                                                                  
“fleeing? from what? why?”                                                        
“from some strange creatures out of shadow. i never found out why.”               
“interesting,” he said, and i had to agree. i had thought of it often, back       
in my cell, wondering just why random had entered, stage left, pursued by         
furies, in the first place. from the moment we met until the moment we            
parted, we had been in some sort of peril; i had been preoccupied with my         
own troubles and he had volunteered nothing concerning his abrupt                 
appearance. it had crossed my mind, of course, at the time of his arrival, but    
i was uncertain as to whether it was something of which i might be                
expected to have knowledge, and i let it go at that. events then submerged it     
until later in my cell and again the present moment. interesting? indeed.         
also, troubling.                                                                  
“i managed to take in random as to my condition,” i continued. “he                
believed i was seeking the throne, when all that i was consciously seeking        
was my memory. he agreed to help me return to amber, and he succeeded             
in getting me back. well, almost,” i corrected. “we wound up in rebma. by         
then, i had told random my true condition, and he proposed my walking             
the pattern again as a means of restoring it fully. the opportunity was there,    
and i took it. it proved effective, and i used the power of the pattern to        
transport myself into amber.” he smiled.                                          
“at this point. random must have been a very unhappy man,” he said.               
“he was not exactly singing with glee,” i said. “he had accepted                  
moire’s judgment, that he wed a woman of her choosing—a blind girl                
named vialle—and remain there with her for at least a year. i left him            
behind, and i later learned that he had done this thing. deirdre was also         
there. we had encountered her along the way, in flight from amber, and the        
three of us had entered rebma together. she remained behind, also.”               
i finished my wine and benedict nodded toward the bottle. it was                  
almost empty, though, so he fetched a fresh bottle from his chest and we          
filled our cups. i took a long swallow. it was better wine than the previous.     
must have been his private stock.                                                 
“in the palace,” i went on, “i made my way to the library, where i                
obtained a pack of the tarots. this was my main reason for venturing there.       
i was surprised by eric before i could do much else and we fought, there in       
the library. i succeeded in wounding him and believe i could have finished        
him, save that reinforcements arrived and i was forced to flee. i contacted       
bleys then, who gave me passage to him in shadow. you may have heard              
the rest from your own sources. how bleys and i threw in together,                
assaulted amber, lost. he fell from the face of kolvir. i tossed him my           
tarots and be caught them. i understand that his body was never found. but        
it was a long way down—though i believe the tide was high by then. i do           
not know whether he died that day or not.”                                        
“neither do i,” said benedict.                                                    
“so i was imprisoned and eric was crowned. i was prevailed upon to                
assist in the coronation, despite a small demurrer on my part. i did succeed      
in crowning myself before that bastard—genealogically speaking—had it             
back and placed it on his own head. then he had me blinded and sent to the        
dungeons.”                                                                        
he leaned forward and studied my face. “yes,” he said, “i had heard               
that. how was it done?”                                                           
“hot irons,” i said, wincing involuntarily and repressing an impulse to           
clutch at my eyes. “i passed out partway through the ordeal.”                     
“was there actual contact with the eyeballs?”                                     
“yes” i said. “i think so.”                                                       
“and how long did the regeneration take?”                                         
“it was close to four years before i could see again,” i said, “and my            
vision is just getting back to normal now. so—about five years altogether, i      
would say.”                                                                       
he leaned back, sighed, and smiled faintly.                                       
“good,” he said. “you give me some small hope. others of us have lost             
portions of their anatomy and experienced regeneration also, of course, but       
i never lost anything significant—until now.”                                     
“oh yes,” i said. “it is a most impressive record. i reviewed it regularly        
for years. a collection of bits and pieces, many of them forgotten i daresay,     
but by the principals and myself: fingertips, toes, ear lobes. i would say that   
there is hope for your arm. not for a long while, of course.                      
“it is a good thing that you are ambidextrous,” i added.                          
his smile went on and off and he took a drink of wine. no, he was not             
ready to tell me what had happened to him.                                        
i took another sip of my own. i did not want to tell him about dworkin.           
i had wanted to save dworkin as something of an ace in the hole. none of          
us understood the man’s full power, and he was obviously mad. but he              
could be manipulated. even dad had apparently come to fear him after a            
time, and had had him locked away. what was it that he had told me back in        
my cell? that dad had had him confined after he had announced his                 
discovery of a means for destroying all of amber. if this was not just the        
rambling of a psychotic and was the real reason for his being where he was,       
then dad had been far more generous that i would have been. the man was           
too dangerous to let live.                                                        
on the other hand, though. dad had been trying to cure him of his                 
condition. dworkin had spoken of doctors, men he had frightened away or           
destroyed when he had turned his powers against them. most of my                  
memories of him were of a wise, kindly old man, quite devoted to dad and          
the rest of the family. it would be difficult readily to destroy someone like     
that if there was some hope. he had been confined to what should have             
been inescapable quarters. yet when he had grown bored one day, he had            
simply walked out. no man can walk through shadow in amber, the very              
absence of shadow, so he had done something i did not understand,                 
something involving the principle behind the trumps, and had left his             
quarters.                                                                         
before he returned to them, i managed to persuade him to provide me               
with a similar exit from my own cell, one that transported me to the              
lighthouse of cabra, where i recovered somewhat, then set out upon the            
voyage that took me to lorraine. most likely he was still undetected. as i        
understood it, our family had always possessed special powers, but it was         
he who analyzed them and formalized their functions by means of the               
pattern and the tarots. he had often tried to discuss the matter, but it had      
seemed awfully abstract and boring to most of us. we are a very pragmatic         
family, damn it! brand was the only one who seemed to have had any                
interest in the subject. and fiona. i had almost forgotten. sometimes fiona       
would listen. and dad. dad knew an awful lot of things that he never              
discussed. he never had much time for us, and there were so many things           
about him that we did not know. but he was probably as well versed as             
dworkin in whatever principles were involved.                                     
their main difference was one of application. dworkin was an artist. i            
do not really know what dad was. he never encouraged intimacy, though             
he was not an unkind father. whenever he took note of us, he was quite            
lavish with gifts and diversions. but he left our upbringing to various           
members of his court. he tolerated us, i feel, as occasionally inevitable         
consequences of passion. actually, i am quite surprised that the family is        
not much larger. the thirteen of us, plus two brothers and a sister i knew        
who were now dead, represent close to fifteen hundred years of parental           
production. there had been a few others also, of whom i had heard, long           
before us, who had not survived. not a tremendous batting average for so          
lusty a liege, but then none of us had proved excessively fertile either. as      
soon as we were able to fend for ourselves and walk in shadow, dad had            
encouraged us to do so, find places where we would be happy and settle            
there. this was my connection with the avalon which is no more.                   
so far as i knew, dad’s own origins were known only to himself. i had             
never encountered anyone whose memory stretched back to a time when               
there had been no oberon. strange? not to know where one’s own father             
comes from, when one has had centuries in which to exercise one’s                 
curiosity? yes. but he was secretive, powerful, shrewd—traits we all              
possess to some degree. he wanted us well situated and satisfied, i feel—         
but never so endowed as to present a threat to his own reign. there was in        
him, i guessed, an element of uneasiness, a not unjustifiable sense of            
caution with respect to our learning too much concerning himself and times        
long gone by. i do not believe that he had ever truly envisioned a time when      
he would not rule in amber. he occasionally spoke, jokingly or                    
grumblingly, of abdication. but i always felt this to be a calculated thing, to   
see what responses it would provoke. he must have realized the state of           
affairs his passing would produce, but refused to believe that the situation      
would ever occur. and no one of us really knew all of his duties and              
responsibilities, his secret commitments.                                         
as distasteful as i found the admission, i was coming to feel that none           
of us was really fit to take the throne. i would have liked to blame dad for      
this inadequacy, but unfortunately i had known freud too long not to feel         
self-conscious about it. also, i was now beginning to wonder about the            
validity of any of our claims. if there had been no abdication and he did         
indeed still live, then the best of us could really hope to do was sit in         
regency. i would not look forward—especially from the throne—to his               
returning and finding things otherwise. let’s face it, i was afraid of him,       
and not without cause. only a fool does not fear a genuine power that he          
does not understand. but whether the title be king or regent, my claim on it      
was stronger than eric’s and i was still determined to have it. if a power out    
of dad’s dark past, which none of us really understood, could serve to            
secure it, and if dworkin did represent such a power, then he must remain         
hidden until he could be employed on my behalf.                                   
even, i asked myself, if the power he represented was the power to                
destroy amber itself, and with it to shatter the shadow worlds and capsize        
all of existence as i understood it?                                              
especially then, i answered myself. for who else could be trusted with            
such power? we are indeed a very pragmatic family.                                
more wine, and then i fumbled with my pipe, cleaning it, repacking it.            
“that, basically, is my story to date,” i said, regarding my handiwork,           
rising and taking a light from the lamp. “after i recovered my sight, i           
managed to escape, fled amber, tarried for a time in a place called lorraine,     
where i encountered ganelon, then came here.”                                     
“why?”                                                                            
i reseated myself and looked at him again.                                        
“because it is near to the avalon i once knew,” i said.                           
i had purposely refrained from mentioning any earlier acquaintanceship            
with ganelon, and hoped that he would take a cue from it. this shadow was         
near enough to our avalon so that ganelon should be familiar with its             
topography and most of its customs. for whatever it was worth, it seemed          
politic to keep this information from benedict.                                   
he passed over it as i thought he might, buried there where it was                
beside more interesting digging.                                                  
“and of your escape?” he asked. “how did you manage that?”                        
“i had help, of course,” i admitted, “in getting out of the cell. once out        
—well, there are still a few passages of which eric is unaware.”                  
“i see,” he said, nodding—hoping, naturally, that i would go on to                
mention my partisans‘ names, but knowing better than to ask.                      
i puffed my pipe and leaned back, smiling.                                        
“it is good to have friends,” he said, as if in agreement with some               
unvoiced thought i might be entertaining.                                         
“i guess that we all have a few of them in amber.”                                
“i like to think so,” he said. then, “i understand you left the partly            
whittled cell door locked behind you, had set fire to your bedding, and had       
drawn pictures on the wall.”                                                      
“yes,” i said. “prolonged confinement does something to a man’s mind.             
at least, it did to mine. there are long periods during which i know i was        
irrational.”                                                                      
“i do not envy you the experience, brother,” he said. “not at all. what           
are your plans now?”                                                              
“they are still uncertain.”                                                       
“do you feel that you might wish to remain here?”                                 
“i do not know,” i said. “what is the state of affairs here?”                     
“i am in charge,” he said—a simple statement of fact, not a boast. “i             
believe i have just succeeded in destroying the only major threat to the          
realm. if i am correct, then a reasonably tranquil period should be at hand.      
the price was high”—he glanced at what remained of his arm—“but will              
have been worth it—as shall be seen before very long, when things have            
returned to normal.”                                                              
he then proceeded to relate what was basically the same situation the             
youth had described, going on to tell how they had won the battle. the            
leader of the hellmaids slain, her riders had bolted and fled. most of them       
were also slain then, and the caverns had been sealed once more. benedict         
had decided to maintain a small force in the field for mopping—up                 
purposes, his scouts the while combing the area for survivors.                    
he made no mention of the meeting between himself and their leader,               
lintra.                                                                           
“who slew their leader?” i asked him.                                             
“i managed it,” he said, making a sudden movement with his stump,                 
“though i hesitated a moment too long on my first blow.”                          
i glanced away and so did ganelon. when i looked back, his face had               
returned to normal and he had lowered his arm.                                    
“we looked for you. did you know that, corwin?” he asked. “brand                  
searched for you in many shadows, as did gerard. you guessed correctly as         
to what eric said after your disappearance that day. we were inclined to          
look farther than his word, however. we tried your trump repeatedly, but          
there was no response. it must be that brain damage can block it. that is         
interesting. your failure to respond to the trump led us to believe you had       
died. then julian, caine, and random joined the search.”                          
“all that? really? i am astonished.”                                              
he smiled.                                                                        
“oh,” i said then, and smiled myself.                                             
their joining the hunt at that point meant that it was not my welfare that        
concerned them, but the possibility of obtaining evidence of fratricide           
against eric, so as to displace him or blackmail him.                             
“i sought for you in the vicinity of avalon,” he continued, “and i found          
this place and was taken by it. it was in a pitiful condition in those days,      
and for generations i worked to restore it to its former glory. while i began     
this in memory of you, i developed a fondness for this land and its people.       
they came to consider me their protector, and so did i.”                          
i was troubled as well as touched by this. was he implying that i had             
fouled things up terribly and that he had tarried here to put them in order—      
so as to clean up after his kid brother this one last time? or did he mean that   
he realized i had loved this place—or a place very much like it—and that he       
had worked to set it in good order as something i might have wished done?         
perhaps i was becoming oversensitive.                                             
“it is good to know that i was sought,” i said, “and it is very good to           
know that you are the defender of this land. i would like to see this place,      
for it does remind me of the avalon that i knew. would you have any               
objections to my visiting here?”                                                  
“that is all that you wish to do? visit?”                                         
“that is all that i had in mind.”                                                 
“know then that what is remembered of the shadow of yourself that                 
once reigned here is not good. children are not named corwin in this place,       
nor am i brother to any corwin here.”                                             
“i understand,” i said. “my name is corey. can we be old friends?” he             
nodded.                                                                           
“old friends of mine are always welcome to visit here,” he said.                  
i smiled and nodded. i felt insulted that he would entertain the notion           
that i had designs upon this shadow of a shadow: i, who had—albeit but for        
an instant—felt the cold fire of amber’s crown upon my brow.                      
i wondered what his attitude would have been had he known of my                   
responsibility, when it came down to basics, for the raids. for that matter, i    
suppose, i was also responsible for the loss of his arm. i preferred to push      
things one step farther back, however, and hold eric responsible. after all,      
it was his action that had prompted my curse.                                     
still, i hoped that benedict would never find out i wanted very badly to          
know where he stood with respect to eric. would he support him, throw his         
weight behind me, or just stay out of the way when i made my move?                
conversely, i was certain that he wondered whether my ambitions were              
dead or still smoldering—and if the latter, what my plans were for stoking        
them. so…                                                                         
who was going to raise the matter?                                                
i took several good puffs on my pipe, finished my wine, poured some               
more, puffed again. i listened to the sounds of the camp, the wind, my            
stomach… benedict took a sip of wine.                                             
then, “what are your long-range plans?” he asked me, almost casually.             
i could say that i had not made up my mind yet, that i was simply happy           
to be free, alive, seeing… i could tell him that that was enough for me, for      
now, that i had no special plans…                                                 
… and he would know that i lied in my teeth. for he knew me better                
than that.                                                                        
so, “you know what my plans are,” i said.                                         
“if you were to ask for my support,” he said, “i would deny it. amber is          
in bad enough shape without another power grab.”                                  
“eric is a usurper.”                                                              
“i choose to look upon him as regent only. at this time, any of us who            
claims the throne is guilty of usurpation.”                                       
“then you believe dad still lives?”                                               
“yes. alive and distressed. he has made several attempts to                       
communicate.”                                                                     
i succeeded in keeping my face from showing anything. so i was not                
the only one, then. to reveal my experiences at this point would sound            
hypocritical, opportunistic, or a flat lie—since in our seeming contact of        
five years ago he had given me the go—ahead to take the throne. of course,        
he could have been referring to a regency then…                                   
“you did not lend support to eric when he took the throne,” i said.               
“would you give it to him now that he holds it, if an attempt were made to        
unseat him?”                                                                      
“it is as i said,” he told me. “i look upon him as regent. i do not say that      
i approve of this, but i desire no further strife in amber.”                      
“then you would support him?”                                                     
“i have said all that i have to say on the matter. you are welcome to visit       
my avalon, but not to use it as a staging area for an invasion of amber.          
does that clarify matters with respect to anything you may have in mind?”         
“it clarifies matters,” i said.                                                   
“this being the case, do you still wish to visit here?”                           
“i do not know,” i said. “does your desire to avoid strife in amber work          
both ways?”                                                                       
“what do you mean?”                                                               
“i mean that if i were returned to amber against my will, i would damn            
well create as much strife as i could to prevent a recurrence of my previous      
situation.”                                                                       
the lines went out of his face and he slowly lowered his eyes.                    
“i did not mean to imply that i would betray you. do you think that i am          
without feelings, corwin? i would not see you imprisoned again, blinded—          
or worse. you are always welcome to visit here, and you may leave your            
fears along with your ambitions at the border.”                                   
“then i would still like to visit,” i said. “i have no army, nor did i come       
here to recruit one.”                                                             
“then you know that you are most welcome.”                                        
“thank you, benedict. while i did not expect to find you here, i am               
glad that i did.” he reddened faintly and nodded.                                 
“it pleases me, also,” he said. “am i the first of us you have seen—              
since your escape?” i nodded.                                                     
“yes, and i am curious as to how everyone is faring. any major                    
reports?”                                                                         
“no new deaths,” he said.                                                         
we both chuckled, and i knew that i would have to turn up the family              
gossip on my own. it had been worth the attempt, though.                          
“i am planning on remaining in the field for a time,” he said, “and               
continuing my patrols until i am satisfied that none of the invaders remain.      
it could be another week before we withdraw.”                                     
“oh? then it was not a total victory?”                                            
“i believe that it was, but i never take unnecessary chances. it is worth a       
little more time to be certain.”                                                  
“prudent,” i said, nodding.                                                       
“…so unless you have a strong desire to remain here in camp, i see no             
reason why you should not proceed on toward town and get near the center          
of things. i maintain several residences about avalon. i have in mind for         
your use a small manor house that i have found pleasant. it is not far from       
town.”                                                                            
“i look forward to seeing it.”                                                    
“i will provide you with a map and a letter to my steward in the                  
morning.”                                                                         
“thank you, benedict.”                                                            
“i will join you there as soon as i have finished here,” he said, “and in         
the meantime, i have messengers passing that way daily. i will keep in            
touch with you through them.”                                                     
“very good.”                                                                      
“then find yourselves a comfortable piece of ground,” he said. “you’ll            
not miss the breakfast call, i’m sure.”                                           
“i seldom do,” i said. “is it all right if we sleep at that spot where we         
left our gear?”                                                                   
“certainly,” he said, and we finished the wine.                                   
as we left his tent, i seized the flap up high when i opened it and was           
able to squeeze it several inches to the side when i cast it before me.           
benedict bade us good night and turned away as he let it fall, not noticing       
the gap of several inches that i had created along its one side.                  
i made my bed up a good distance to the right of our equipment, facing            
in the direction of benedict’s tent, and i moved the gear itself as i             
rummaged through it. ganelon shot me a quizzical look, but i simply               
nodded and made a movement with my eyes toward the tent. he glanced               
that way, returned the nod, and proceeded to spread his own blankets farther      
to the right                                                                      
i measured it with my eyes, walked over, and said, “you know, i’d                 
much rather sleep here. would you mind switching with me?” i added a              
wink for emphasis.                                                                
“makes no difference to me,” be said, shrugging.                                  
the campfires had died or were dying, and most of the company had                 
turned in. the guard only paid us heed a couple of times around. the camp         
was very quiet and there were no clouds to obscure the brilliance of the          
stars. i was tired, and the smells of the smoke and the damp earth came           
pleasantly to my nostrils, reminding me of other times and places such as         
this and the rest at the day’s end.                                               
instead of closing my eyes, however, i fetched my pack and propped my             
back against it, filled my pipe again, and struck it to life.                     
i adjusted my position twice as he paced within the tent. once, he                
vanished from my field of vision and remained hidden for several moments.         
but the far light moved then, and i knew that he had opened the chest. then       
he came into sight once more and cleared the table, dropped back for an           
instant, returned and reseated himself in his earlier position. i moved so that   
i could keep sight of his left arm.                                               
he was paging through a book, or sorting something of about that size.            
cards, maybe? naturally.                                                          
i would have given a lot for one glimpse of the trump that he finally             
settled upon and held before him. i would have given a lot to have                
grayswandir beneath my hand, in case another person suddenly came into            
the tent by means other than the entrance through which i spied. my palms         
and the soles of my feet tingled, in anticipation of flight or combat.            
but he remained alone.                                                            
he sat there unmoving for perhaps a quarter of an hour, and when he               
finally stirred it was only to replace the cards somewhere in his chest and to    
extinguish the lamps.                                                             
the guard continued on his monotonous rounds and ganelon began to                 
snore.                                                                            
i emptied my pipe and rolled over onto my side.                                   
tomorrow, i told myself. if i wake up here tomorrow, everything will be           
all right…                                                                        
                                                                     
chapter 5                                                                         
i sucked on a blade of grass and watched the mill wheel turn. i was lying         
on my stomach on the stream’s opposite bank, my head propped in my                
hands. there was a tiny rainbow in the mist above the froth and boil at the       
foot of the waterfall, and an occasional droplet found its way to me. the         
steady splashing and the sound of the wheel drowned out all other noises in       
the wood. the mill was deserted today, and i contemplated it because i had        
not seen its like in ages. watching the wheel and listening to the water were     
more than just relaxing. it was somewhat hypnotic.                                
it was our third day at benedict’s place, and ganelon was off in town             
seeking amusement. i had accompanied him on the previous day and                  
learned what i wanted to know at that time. now i had no time for sight-          
seeing. i had to think and act quickly. there had been no difficulty at the       
camp. benedict had seen us fed and had furnished us with the map and the          
letter he had promised. we had departed at sunrise and arrived at the manor       
around midday. we were well received, and after settling into the quarters        
we were shown, we had made our way into town, where we had spent the              
balance of the day.                                                               
benedict was planning to remain in the field for several more days. i             
would have to be done with the task i had set myself before he came home.         
so a hellride was in order. there was no time for leisurely journeying, i had     
to remember the proper shadows and be under way soon.                             
it would have been refreshing, being in this place that was so like my            
avalon, except that my thwarted purposes were reaching the point of               
obsession. realizing this was not tantamount to controlling it, however.          
familiar sights and sounds had diverted me only briefly, then i had turned        
once more to my planning.                                                         
it should work out neatly, as i saw it. this one journey should solve two         
of my problems, if i could manage it without arousing suspicion. it meant         
that i would definitely be gone overnight, but i had anticipated this and had     
already instructed ganelon to cover for me.                                       
my head nodding with each creak of the wheel, i forced everything else            
from my mind and set about remembering the necessary texture of the sand,         
its coloration, the temperature, the winds, the touch of salt in the air, the     
clouds…                                                                           
i slept then and i dreamed, but not of the place that i sought.                   
i regarded a big roulette wheel, and we were all of us on it—my                   
brothers, my sisters, myself, and others whom i knew or had known—rising          
and falling, each with his allotted section. we were all shouting for it to stop  
for us and wailing as we passed the top and headed down once more. the            
wheel had begun to slow and i was on the rise. a fair-haired youth hung           
upside down before me, shouting pleas and warnings that were drowned in           
the cacophony of voices. his face darkened, writhed, became a horrible            
thing to behold, and i slashed at the cord that bound his ankle and he fell       
from sight. the wheel slowed even more as i neared the top, and i saw             
lorraine then. she was gesturing, beckoning frantically, and calling my           
name. i leaned toward her, seeing her clearly, wanting her, wanting to help       
her. but as the wheel continued its turning she passed from my sight.             
“corwin!”                                                                         
i tried to ignore her cry, for i was almost to the top. it came again, but i      
tensed myself and prepared to spring upward. if it did not stop for me, i was     
going to try gimmicking the damned thing, even though falling off would           
mean my total ruin. i readied myself for the leap. another click…                 
“corwin!”                                                                         
it receded, returned, faded, and i was looking toward the water wheel             
again with my name echoing in my ears and mingling, merging, fading into          
the sound of the stream.                                                          
i blinked my eyes and ran my fingers through my hair. a number of                 
dandelions fell about my shoulders as i did so, and i heard a giggle from         
somewhere behind me.                                                              
i turned quickly and stared.                                                      
she stood about a dozen paces from me, a tail, slender girl with dark             
eyes and close-cropped brown hair. she wore a fencing jacket and held a           
rapier in her right hand, a mask in her left. she was looking at me and           
laughing. her teeth were white, even and a trifle long; a band of freckles        
crossed her small nose and the upper portions of her well-tanned cheeks.          
there was that air of vitality about her which is attractive in ways different    
from mere comeliness. especially, perhaps, when viewed from the vantage           
of many years. she saluted me with her blade. “en garde, corwin!” she             
said.                                                                             
“who the devil are you?” i asked, just then noticing a jacket, mask, and          
rapier beside me in the grass.                                                    
“no questions, no answers,” she said. “not till we’ve fenced.”                    
she fitted her mask over her head then and waited.                                
i rose and picked up the jacket. i could see that it would be easier to           
fence than argue with her. the fact that she knew my name disturbed me,           
and the more that i thought of it the more she seemed somehow familiar. it        
was best to humor her, i decided, shrugging into the jacket and buckling it. i    
picked up the blade, pulled on the mask.                                          
“all right,” i said, sketching a brief salute and advancing. “all right.”         
she moved forward then and we met. i let her carry the attack.                    
she came on very fast with a beat-feint-feint-thrust. my riposte was              
twice as fast, but she was able to parry it and come back with equal speed. i     
began a slow retreat then, drawing her out. she laughed and came on,              
pressing me hard. she was good and she knew it. she wanted to show off.           
she almost got through twice, too, in the same way-low-line-which i did           
not like at all. i caught her with a stop-thrust as soon as i could after that.   
she cursed softly, good-naturedly, as she acknowledged it and came right          
back at me. i do not ordinarily like to fence with women, no matter how           
good they are, but this time i discovered that i was enjoying myself. the         
skill and grace with which she carried the attacks and bore them gave me          
pleasure to behold and respond to, and i found myself contemplating the           
mind that lay behind that style. at first, i had wanted to tire her quickly, to   
conclude the match and question her. now i found myself desiring to               
prolong the encounter.                                                            
she did not tire readily. there was small cause for concern on that               
count. i lost track of time as we stamped back and forth along the bank of        
the stream, our blades clicking steadily.                                         
a long while must have passed, though, before she stamped her heel                
and threw up her blade in a final salute. she tore off her mask then and gave     
me another smile.                                                                 
“thank you!” she said, breathing heavily.                                         
i returned the salute and drew off the bird cage. i tamed and fumbled             
with the jacket buckles, and before i realized it she had approached and          
kissed me on the cheek. she had not had to stand tiptoe to do it either. i felt   
momentarily confused, but i smiled. before i could say anything, she had          
taken my arm and turned me back in the direction from which we had                
come.                                                                             
“i’ve brought us a picnic basket,” she said.                                      
“very good. i am hungry. i am also curious…”                                      
“i will tell you anything that you want to hear,” she said merrily.               
“how about telling me your name?” i said.                                         
“dara,” she replied. “my name is dara, after my grandmother.”                     
she glanced at me as she said it, as though hoping for a reaction. i              
almost hated to disappoint her, but i nodded and repeated it, then, “why did      
you call me corwin?” i asked.                                                     
“because that is your name,” she said. “i recognized you.”                        
“from where?” she released my arm.                                                
“here it is,” she said, reaching behind a tree and raising a basket that          
had been resting upon the ridges of exposed roots.                                
“i hope the ants didn’t get to it,” she said, moving to a shaded area             
beside the stream and spreading a cloth upon the ground.                          
i hung the fencing gear on a nearby shrub.                                        
“you seem to carry quite a few things around with you,” i observed.               
“my horse is back that way,” she said, gesturing downstream with her              
head.                                                                             
she returned her attention to weighing down the cloth and unpacking               
the basket.                                                                       
“why way back there?” i asked.                                                    
“so that i could sneak up on you, of course. if you’d heard a horse               
clomping around you’d have been awake sure as hell.”                              
“you’re probably right,” i said.                                                  
she paused as though pondering deeply, then spoiled it with a giggle.             
“but you didn’t the first time, though. still…”                                   
“the first time?” i said, seeing she wanted me to ask it.                         
“yes, i almost rode over you awhile back,” she said. “you were sound              
asleep. when i saw who it was, i went back for a picnic basket and the            
fencing gear.”                                                                    
“oh. i see.”                                                                      
“come and sit down now,” she said. “and open the bottle, will you?”               
she put a bottle beside my place and carefully unwrapped two crystal              
goblets, which she then set in the center of the cloth.                           
i moved to my place and sat down.                                                 
“that is benedict’s best crystal,” i noted, as i opened the bottle.               
“yes,” she said. “do be careful not to upset them when you pour—and i             
don’t think we should clink them together.”                                       
“no, i don’t think we should,” i said, and i poured. she raised her glass.        
“to the reunion,” she said.                                                       
“what reunion?”                                                                   
“ours.”                                                                           
“i have never met you before.”                                                    
“don’t be so prosaic,” she said, and took a drink.                                
i shrugged. “to the reunion.”                                                     
she began to eat then, so i did too. she was so enjoying the air of               
mystery she had created that i wanted to cooperate, just to keep her happy.       
“now where could i have met you?” i ventured. “was it some great                  
court? a harem, perhaps…?”                                                        
“perhaps it was in amber,” she said. “there you were…”.                           
“amber?” i said, remembering that i was holding benedict’s crystal and            
confining my emotions to my voice. “just who are you, anyway?”                    
“…there you were—handsome, conceited, admired by all the ladies,”                 
she continued, “and there i was—a mousy little thing, admiring you from           
afar. gray, or pastel-not vivid—little dara—a late bloomer, i hasten to add       
—eating her heart out for you—”                                                   
i muttered a mild obscenity and she laughed again. “that wasn’t it?”              
she asked.                                                                        
“no,” i said, taking another bite of beef and bread. “more likely it was          
that brothel where i sprained my back. i was drunk that night—”                   
“you remember!” she cried. “it was a part-time job. i used to break               
horses during the day.”                                                           
“i give up,” i said, and i poured more wine.                                      
the really irritating thing was that there was something damnably                 
familiar about her. but from her appearance and her behavior, i guessed her       
age at about seventeen. this pretty much precluded our paths ever having          
crossed.                                                                          
“did benedict teach you your fencing?” i asked.                                   
“yes.”                                                                            
“what is he to you?”                                                              
“my lover, of course,” she replied. “he keeps me in jewels and furs—              
and he fences with me.” she laughed again.                                        
i continued to study her face. yes, it was possible… “i am hurt,” i said,         
finally.                                                                          
“why?” she asked.                                                                 
“benedict didn’t give me a cigar.”                                                
“cigar?”                                                                          
“you are his daughter, aren’t you?”                                               
she reddened, but she shook her head. “no,” she said. “but you are                
getting close.”                                                                   
“granddaughter?” i said. “well… sort of.”                                         
“i am afraid that i do not understand.”                                           
“grandfather is what he likes me to call him. actually, though, he was            
my grandmother’s father.”                                                         
“i see. are there any others at home like you?”                                   
“no, i am the only one.”                                                          
“what of your mother—and your grandmother?”                                       
“dead, both of them.”                                                             
“how did they die?”                                                               
“violently. both times it happened while he was back in amber. i                  
believe that is why he has not returned there for a long while now. he does       
not like to leave me unprotected—even though he knows that i can take             
care of myself. you know that i can, too, don’t you?”                             
i nodded. it explained several things, one of them being why he was               
protector here. he had to keep her somewhere, and he certainly would not          
want to take her back to amber. he would not even want her existence              
known to the rest of us. she could be made into an easy armlock. and it           
would be out of keeping to make me aware of her so readily.                       
so, “i do not believe that you are supposed to be here,” i said, “and i           
feel that benedict would be quite angry if he knew that you were.”                
“you are just the same as he is! i am an adult, damn it!”                         
“have you heard me deny it? you are supposed to be someplace else,                
though, aren’t you?”                                                              
she filled her mouth instead of answering. so i did, too. after several           
uncomfortable minutes of chewing, i decided to start on a fresh subject.          
“how did you recognize me?” i asked.                                              
she swallowed, took a drink of wine, grinned. “from your picture, of              
course,” she said.                                                                
“what picture?”                                                                   
“on the card,” she said. “we used to play with them when i was very               
small. i learned all my relatives that way. you and eric are the other good       
swordsmen, i knew that. that is why i—”                                           
“you have a set of the trumps?” i interrupted.                                    
“no,” she said, pouting. “he wouldn’t give me a set—and i know he                 
has several, too.”                                                                
“really? where does he keep them?”                                                
she narrowed her eyes, focusing them on my own. damn! i hadn’t                    
meant to sound that eager.                                                        
but, “he has a set with him most of the time,” she said, “and i have no           
idea where he keeps the others. why? won’t he let you see them?”                  
“i haven’t asked him,” i told her. “do you understand their                       
significance?”                                                                    
“there were certain things i was not allowed to do when i was near                
them. i gather that they have a special use, but he never told me what it is.     
they are quite important, aren’t they?”                                           
“yes.”                                                                            
“i thought so. he is always so careful with them. do you have a set?”             
“yes, but it’s out on loan just now.”                                             
“i see. and you would like to use them for something complicated and              
sinister.”                                                                        
i shrugged.                                                                       
“i would like to use them, but for very dull, uncomplicated purposes.”            
“such as?” i shook my head.                                                       
“if benedict does not want you to know their function yet, i am not               
about to tell you.”                                                               
she made a small growling noise.                                                  
“you’re afraid of him,” she said.                                                 
“i have considerable respect for benedict, not to mention some                    
affection.” she laughed.                                                          
“is he a better fighter than you, a better swordsman?”                            
i looked away. she must have just gotten back from someplace fairly               
removed from things. the townspeople i’d met had all known about                  
benedict’s arm. it was not the sort of news that traveled slowly. i certainly     
was not going to be the first to tell her.                                        
“have it as you would,” i said. “where have you been?”                            
“the village,” she said, “in the mountains. grandpa took me there to              
stay with some friends of his called tecys. do you know the tecys?”               
“no, i don’t.”                                                                    
“i’ve been there before,” she said. “he always takes me to stay with              
them in the village when there is any sort of trouble here. the place has no      
name. i just call it the village. it is quite strange—the people, as well as the  
village. they seem to—sort of—worship us. they treat me as if i were              
something holy, and they never tell me anything i want to know. it is not a       
long ride, but the mountains are different, the sky is different—everything!      
—and it is as if there were no way back, once i am there. i had tried coming      
back on my own before, but i just got lost. grandpa always had to come for        
me, and then the way was easy. the tecys follow all of his instructions           
concerning me. they treat him as if he were some sort of god.”                    
“he is,” i said, “to them.”                                                       
“you said that you do not know them.”                                             
“i don’t have to. i know benedict.”                                               
“how does he do it? tell me.” i shook my head.                                    
“how did you do it?” i asked her. “how did you get back here this                 
time?”                                                                            
she finished her wine and held out the glass. when i looked up from               
refilling it, her head was cocked toward her right shoulder, her brows were       
furrowed, and her eyes were focused on something far away.                        
“i do not really know,” she said, raising the glass and sipping from it           
automatically, “l am not quite certain how i went about it…”                      
with her left hand, she began to toy with her knife, finally picking it up.       
“i was mad, mad as hell for having been packed off again,” she said. “i           
told him that i wanted to stay here and fight, but he took me riding with him     
and after a time we arrived at the village. i do not know how. it was not a       
long ride, and suddenly we were there. i know this area. i was born here, i       
grew up here. i’ve ridden all over, hundreds of leagues in all directions. i      
was never able to find it when i went looking. but it seemed only a brief         
while that we rode, and suddenly we were at the tecys‘ again. but it had          
been several years, and i can be more determined about things now that i          
am grown. i resolved to return by myself.”                                        
with the knife, she began scraping and digging at the ground beside her,          
not seeming to notice what she was doing.                                         
“i waited till nightfall,” she went on, “and studied the stars to take my         
direction. it was an unreal feeling. the stars were all different. i didn’t       
recognize any of the constellations. i went back inside and thought about it.     
i was a little bit afraid and did not know what to do. i spent the next day       
trying to get more information out of the tecys and the other people in the       
village. but it was like a bad dream. either they were stupid or they were        
purposely trying to confuse me. not only was there no way to get from             
there to here, they had no idea where ‘here‘ was and were none too certain        
about ‘there.‘ that night i checked the stars again, to be sure about what i      
had seen, and i was about ready to begin believing them.”                         
she moved the knife back and forth as if honing it now, smoothing the             
soil and packing it flat. then she began to trace designs.                        
“for the next several days, i tried to find my way back,” she continued.          
“i thought i could locate our trail and backtrack along it, but it just sort of   
vanished. then i did the only other thing i could think of. each morning i        
struck out in a different direction, rode until noon, then headed back. i came    
across nothing that was familiar. it was totally bewildering. each night i        
went to sleep more angry and upset over the way things were turning out—          
and more determined to find my own way back to avalon. i had to show              
grandpa that he could no longer dump me like a child and expect me to stay        
put.                                                                              
“then, after about a week, i began having dreams. nightmares, sort of.            
did you ever dream that you were running and running and not going                
anyplace? that is sort of what it was like—with the burning spider web.           
only it wasn’t really a spider web, there was no spider and it wasn’t             
burning. but i was caught in this thing, going around it and through it. but i    
wasn’t really moving. that is not completely right, but i do not know how         
else to put it. and i had to keep trying—actually, i wanted to—to move            
about it. when i woke up i was tired, as if i had actually been exerting          
myself all night long. this went on for many nights, and each night it            
seemed stronger and longer and more real.                                         
“then this morning i got up, the dream still dancing in my head, and i            
knew that i could ride home. i set out, still half dreaming, it seemed. i rode    
the entire distance without stopping once, and this time i paid no special        
heed to my surroundings, but kept thinking of avalon-and as i rode, things        
kept getting more and more familiar until i was here again. only then did it      
seem as if i were fully awake. now the village and the tecys, that sky, those     
stars, the woods, the mountains, they all seem like a dream to me. i am not       
at all certain that i could find my way back there. is that not strange? can      
you tell me what happened?”                                                       
i rose and circled the remains of our lunch. i sat down beside her.               
“do you remember the looks of the burning spider web that really                  
wasn’t a spider web, or burning?” i asked her.                                    
“yes—sort of,” she said.                                                          
“give me that knife,” i said.                                                     
she passed it to me.                                                              
with its point, i began adding to her doodling in the dirt, extending             
lines, rubbing some out, adding others. she did not say a word the entire         
time, but she watched every move that i made. when i had finished, i put          
the knife aside and waited for a long, silent while. then, finally, she spoke     
very softly.                                                                      
“yes, that is it,” she said, turning away from the design to stare at me.         
“how did you know? how did you know what i had dreamed?”                          
“because,” i said, “you dreamed a thing that is inscribed in your very            
genes. why, how, i do not know. it demonstrates, however, that you are            
indeed a daughter of amber. what you did was walk in shadow. what you             
dreamed was the great pattern of amber. by its power do those of the              
blood royal hold dominion over shadows. do you understand what i am               
talking about?”                                                                   
“i am not certain,” she said. “i do not think so. i have heard grandpa            
cursing shadows, but i never understood what he meant.”                           
“then you do not know where amber truly lies.”                                    
“no. he was always evasive. he told me of amber and of the family.                
but i do not even know the direction in which amber lies. i only know that        
it is far.”                                                                       
“it lies in all directions,” i said, “or any direction one chooses. one need      
but—”                                                                             
“yes!” she interrupted. “i had forgotten, or thought he was just being            
mysterious or humoring me, but brand said exactly the same thing a long           
while ago. what does it mean, though?”                                            
“brand! when was brand here?”                                                     
“years ago,” she said, “when i was just a little girl. he used to visit here      
often. i was very much in love with him and i pestered him mercilessly. he        
used to tell me stories, teach me games…”                                         
“when was the last time you saw him?”                                             
“oh, eight or nine years ago. i’d say.”                                           
“have you met any of the others?”                                                 
“yes,” she said. “julian and gerard were here not too long ago. just a            
few months back.”                                                                 
i suddenly felt very insecure. benedict had certainly been quiet about a          
lot of things. i would rather have been ill advised than kept totally ignorant    
of affairs. it makes it easier for you to be angry when you find out. the         
trouble with benedict was that he was too honest, though. he would rather         
tell me nothing than lie to me. i felt something unpleasant coming my way,        
however, and knew that there could be no dawdling now, that i would have          
to move as quickly as possible. yes, it had to be a hard hellride for the         
stones. still, there was more to be learned here before i essayed it. time…       
damn!                                                                             
“was that the first time that you met them?” i asked.                             
“yes,” she said, “and my feelings were very hurt.” she paused, sighed.            
“grandpa would not let me speak of our being related. he introduced me as         
his ward. and he refused to tell me why. damn it!”                                
“i’m sure he had some very good reasons.”                                         
“oh, i am too. but it does not make you feel any better, when you have            
been waiting all your life to meet your relatives. do you know why he             
treated me like that?”                                                            
“these are trying times in amber,” i said, “and things will get worse             
before they get better. the fewer people who know of your existence, the          
less chance there is of your getting involved and coming to harm. he did it       
only to protect you.” she made a spitting noise.                                  
“i do not need protecting,” she said. “i can take care of myself.”                
“you are a fine fencer,” i said. “unfortunately, life is more complicated         
than a fair dueling situation.”                                                   
“i know that. i’m not a child. but—”                                              
“ ‘but’ nothing! he did the same thing i’d do if you were mine. he’s              
protecting himself as well as you. i’m surprised he let brand know about          
you. he’s going to be damned mad that i found out.” her head jerked and           
she stared at me, eyes wide.                                                      
“but you wouldn’t do anything to hurt us,” she said. “we—we’re                    
related.”                                                                         
“how the hell do you know why i’m here or what i’m thinking?” i said.             
“you might have just stuck both your necks in nooses!”                            
“you are joking, aren’t you?” she said, slowly raising her left hand              
between us.                                                                       
“i don’t know,” i said. “i need not be—and i wouldn’t be talking about            
it if i did have something rotten in mind, would i?”                              
“no… i guess not,” she said.                                                      
“i am going to tell you something benedict should have told you long              
ago,” i said. “never trust a relative. it is far worse than trusting strangers.   
with a stranger there is a possibility that you might be safe.”                   
“you really mean that, don’t you?”                                                
“yes.”                                                                            
“yourself included?” i smiled.                                                    
“of course it does not apply to me. i am the soul of honor, kindness,             
mercy, and goodness. trust me in all things.”                                     
“i will,” she said, and i laughed.                                                
“i will,” she insisted. “you would not hurt us. i know that.”                     
“tell me about gerard and julian,” i said, feeling uncomfortable, as              
always, in the presence of unsolicited trust. “what was the reason for their      
visit?”                                                                           
she was silent for a moment, still studying me, then, “i have been                
telling you quite a few things,” she said, “haven’t i? you are right. one can     
never be too careful. i believe that it is your turn to talk again.”              
“good. you are learning how to deal with us. what do you want to                  
know?”                                                                            
“where is the village, really? and amber? they are somehow alike,                 
aren’t they? what did you mean when you said that amber lies in all               
directions, or any? what are shadows?”                                            
i got to my feet and looked down at her. i held out my hand. she looked           
very young and more than a little frightened then, but she took it.               
“where…?” she asked, rising.                                                      
“this way,” i said, and i took her to stand at the place where i had slept        
and regarded the falls and the water wheel.                                       
she began to say something, but i stopped her. “look. just look,” i said.         
so we stood there looking at the rushing, the splashing, the turning              
while i ordered my mind.                                                          
then, “come,” i said, turning her by the elbow and walking her toward             
the wood.                                                                         
as we moved among the trees, a cloud obscured the sun and the                     
shadows deepened. the voices of the birds grew more shrill and a                  
dampness came up out of the ground. as we passed from tree to tree, their         
leaves became longer and broader. when the sun appeared again, its light          
came more yellow, and beyond a turning of the way we encountered                  
hanging vines. the bird cries grew hoarser, more numerous. our trail took         
an upward turn, and i led her past an outcropping of flint and onto higher        
ground. a distant, barely perceptible rumble seemed to come from behind           
us. the sky was a different blue as we moved through an open place, and           
we frightened a large, brown lizard that had been sunning itself on a rock.       
as we took a turn about another mass of stone, she said, “i did not know          
this was here. i have never been this way before.” but i did not answer her,      
for i was busy shifting the stuff of shadow.                                      
then we faced the wood once more, but now the way led uphill through              
it. now the trees were tropical giants, interspersed with ferns, and new          
noises—barks, hisses, and buzzes—were to be heard. moving up this trail,          
the rumble grew louder about us, the very ground beginning to vibrate with        
it. dara held tightly to my arm, saying nothing now, but searching                
everything with her eyes. there were big, flat, pale flowers and puddles          
where the moisture dripped from overhead. the temperature had risen               
considerably and we were perspiring quite a bit. now the rumble grew to a         
mighty roar, and when at length we emerged from the wood again, it was a          
sound like steady thunder that fell against us. i guided her to the edge of the   
precipice and gestured outward and down.                                          
it plunged for over a thousand feet: a mighty cataract that smote the             
gray river like an anvil. the currents were rapid and strong, bearing bubbles     
and flecks of foam a great distance before they finally dissolved. across         
from us, perhaps half a mile distant, partly screened by rainbow and mist,        
like an island slapped by a titan, a gigantic wheel slowly rotated,               
ponderous and gleaming. high overhead, enormous birds rode like drifting          
crucifixes the currents of the air.                                               
we stood there for a fairly long while. conversation was impossible,              
which was just as well. after a time, when she turned from it to look at me,      
narrow-eyed, speculative, i nodded and gestured with my eyes toward the           
wood. turning then, we made our way back in the direction from which we           
had come.                                                                         
our return was the same process in reverse, and i managed it with                 
greater ease. when conversation became possible once more, dara still kept        
her silence, apparently realizing by then that i was a part of the process of     
change going on around us.                                                        
it was not until we stood beside our own stream once more, watching               
the small mill wheel in its turning, that she spoke.                              
“was that place like the village?”                                                
“yes. a shadow.”                                                                  
“and like amber?”                                                                 
“no. amber casts shadow. it can be sliced to any shape, if you know               
how. that place was a shadow, your village was a shadow—and this place            
is a shadow. any place that you can imagine exists somewhere in shadow.”          
“…and you and grandpa and the others can go about in these shadows,               
picking and choosing what you desire?”                                            
“yes.”                                                                            
“that is what i did, then, coming back from the village?”                         
“yes.”                                                                            
her face became a study in realization. her almost black eyebrows                 
dropped half an inch and her nostrils flared with a quick inhalation.             
“i can do it, too…” she said. “go anywhere, do anything i want!”                  
“the ability lies within you,” i said.                                            
she kissed me then, a sudden, impulsive thing, then rotated away, her             
hair bobbing on her slim neck as she tried to look at everything at once.         
“then i can do anything,” she said, coming to a standstill.                       
“there are limitations, dangers…”                                                 
“that is life,” she said. “how do i learn to control it?”                         
“the great pattern of amber is the key. you must walk it in order to              
gain the ability. it is inscribed on the floor in a chamber beneath the palace    
in amber. it is quite large. you must begin on the outside and walk it to its     
center without stopping. there is considerable resistance and the feat is         
quite an ordeal. if you stop, if you attempt to depart the pattern before         
completing it, it will destroy you. complete it, though, and your power over      
shadow will be subject to your conscious control.”                                
she raced to our picnic site and studied the pattern we had drawn on the          
ground there.                                                                     
i followed more slowly. as i drew near, she said, “i must go to amber             
and walk it!”                                                                     
“i am certain that benedict plans for you to do so, eventually,” i said.          
“eventually?” she said. “now! i must walk it now! why did he never                
tell me of these things?”                                                         
“because you cannot do it yet. conditions in amber are such that it               
would be dangerous to both of you to allow your existence to become               
known there. amber is barred to you, temporarily.”                                
“it is not fair!” she said, turning to glare at me.                               
“of course not,” i said. “but that is the way things stand just now. don’t        
blame me.”                                                                        
the words came somewhat stickily to my lips. part of the blame, of                
course, was mine.                                                                 
“it would almost be better if you had not told me of these things,” she           
said, “if i cannot have them.”                                                    
“it is not as bad as all that,” i said. “the situation in amber will become       
stable again-before too very long.”                                               
“how will i learn of it?”                                                         
“benedict will know. he will tell you then.”                                      
“he has not seen fit to tell me much of anything!”                                
“to what end? just to make you feel bad? you know that he has been                
good to you, that he cares for you. when the time is ready, he will move on       
your behalf.”                                                                     
“and if he does not? will you help me then?”                                      
“i will do what i can.”                                                           
“how will i be able to find you? to let you know?”                                
i smiled. it had gotten to this point without my half trying. no need to          
tell her the really important part. just enough to be possibly useful to me       
later…                                                                            
“the cards,” i said, “the family trumps. they are more than a mere                
sentimental affectation. they are a means of communication. get hold of           
mine, stare at it, concentrate on it, try to keep all other thoughts out of your  
mind, pretend that it is really me and begin talking to me then. you will find    
that it really is, and that i am answering you.”                                  
“those are all the things grandpa told me not to do when i handle the             
cards!”                                                                           
“of course.”                                                                      
“how does it work?”                                                               
“another time,” i said. “a thing for a thing. remember? i have told you           
now of amber and of shadow. tell me of the visit here by gerard and               
julian.”                                                                          
“yes,” she said. “there is not really much to tell, though. one morning,          
five or six months ago. grandpa simply stopped what he was doing. he was          
pruning some trees back in the orchard—he likes to do that himself—and i          
was helping him. he was up on a ladder, snipping away, and suddenly he            
just stopped, lowered the clippers, and did not move for several minutes. i       
thought that he was just resting, and i kept on with my raking. then i heard      
him talking—not just muttering—but talking as though he were carrying on          
a conversation. at first, i thought he was talking to me, and i asked him         
what he had said. he ignored me, though. now that i know about the                
trumps, i realize that he must have been talking to one of them just then.        
probably julian. anyway, he climbed down from the ladder quite quickly            
after that, told me he had to go away for a day or so, and started back           
toward the manor. he stopped before he had gone very far, though, and             
returned. that was when he told me that if julian and gerard were to visit        
here that i was to be introduced as his ward, the orphaned daughter of a          
faithful servant. he rode away a short while later, leading two spare horses.     
he was wearing his blade.                                                         
“he returned in the middle of the night, bringing both of them with him.          
gerard was barely conscious. his left leg was broken, and the entire left         
side of his body was badly bruised. julian was quite battered also, but—he        
had no broken bones. they remained with us for the better part of a month,        
and they healed quickly. then they borrowed two horses and departed. i            
have not seen them since.”                                                        
“what did they say as to how they had been injured?”                              
“only that they had been in an accident they would not discuss it with            
me.”                                                                              
“where? where did it happen?”                                                     
“on the black road. i overheard them talking about it several times.”             
“where is this black road?”                                                       
“i do not know.”                                                                  
“what did they say about it?”                                                     
“they cursed it a lot. that was all.”                                             
looking down, i saw that there was some wine left in the bottle. i                
stooped and poured two final drinks, passed her one.                              
“to the reunion,” i said, and smiled.                                             
“…the reunion,” she agreed, and we drank.                                         
she began cleaning the area and i assisted her, my earlier sense of               
urgency upon me once again.                                                       
“how long should i wait before i try to reach you?” she asked.                    
“three months. give me three months.”                                             
“where will you be then?”                                                         
“in amber, i hope.”                                                               
“how long will you be staying here?”                                              
“not very. in fact, i have to take a little trip right now. i should be back      
tomorrow, though. i will probably only be staying for a few days after that.”     
“i wish you would stay longer.”                                                   
“i wish that i could. i would like to, now that i have met you.”                  
she reddened and turned what seemed all of her attention to repacking             
the basket. i gathered up the fencing gear.                                       
“are you going back to the manor now?” she said.                                  
“to the stables. i’ll be leaving immediately.”                                    
she picked up the basket.                                                         
“we will go together then. my horse is this way.” i nodded and                    
followed her toward a footpath to our right.                                      
“i suppose,” she said, “that it would be best for me not to mention any           
of this to anybody. grandpa in particular?”                                       
“that would be prudent.”                                                          
the splash and gurgle of the stream, as it flowed to the river, on its way        
to the sea, faded, faded, was gone, and only the creak of the land-locked         
wheel that cut it as it went, remained for a time in the air.                     
                                                                     
chapter 6                                                                         
steady movement is more important than speed, much of the time. so long           
as there is a regular progression of stimuli to get your mental hooks into,       
there is room for lateral movement. once this begins, its rate is a matter of     
discretion.                                                                       
so i moved slowly, but steadily, using my discretion. no sense in tiring          
star unnecessarily. rapid shifts are hard enough on people. animals, who          
are not so good at lying to themselves, have a rougher time of it, sometimes      
going completely berserk.                                                         
i crossed the stream at a small wooden bridge and moved parallel to it            
for a time. my intention was to skirt the town itself, but to follow the          
general direction of the watercourse until i reached the vicinity of the coast.   
it was mid-afternoon. my way was shaded, cool. grayswandir hung at my             
side.                                                                             
i bore west, coming at length to the hills that rose there. i refrained from      
beginning the shift until after i had reached a point that looked down upon       
the city that represented the largest concentration of population in this realm   
that was like my avalon.                                                          
the city bore the same name, and several thousand people lived there,             
worked there. several of the silver towers were missing, and the stream cut       
the city at a somewhat different angle farther south, having widened or been      
widened eightfold by then. there was some smoke from the smithies and             
the public houses, stirred lightly by breezes from the south; people,             
mounted, afoot, driving wagons, driving coaches, moved through the                
narrow streets, entered and departed shops, hostels, residences; flocks of        
birds wheeled, descended, rose about the places where horses were                 
tethered; a few bright pennons and banners stirred listlessly; the water          
sparkled and there was a haze in the air. i was too far away to hear the          
sounds of voices, and of clanking, hammering, sawing, rattling, and               
creaking as anything other than a generalized hum. while i could                  
distinguish no individual odors, had i still been blind i would have known        
by sniffing the air that a city was near.                                         
seeing it from up there, a certain nostalgia came over me, a wistful rag-         
tail of a dream accompanied by a faint longing for the place that was this        
place’s namesake to me in a vanished shadowland of long ago, where life           
had been just as simple and i happier than i was at that moment.                  
but one does not live as long as i have lived without achieving that              
quality of consciousness which strips naive feelings as they occur and is         
generally loathe to participate in the creation of sentimentality.                
those days were passed, that thing done with, and it was amber now                
that held me completely. i turned and continued southward, confirmed in           
my desire to succeed. amber, i do not forget…                                     
the sun became a dazzling, bright blister above my head and the winds             
began to scream about me. the sky grew more and more yellow and glaring           
as i rode, until it was as if a desert stretched from horizon to horizon          
overhead. the hills grew rockier as i descended toward the lowlands,              
exhibiting wind-sculpted forms of grotesque shape and somber coloration.          
a dust storm struck me as i emerged from the foothills, so that i had to          
muffle my face with my cloak and narrow my eyes to slits. star whinnied,          
snuffled repeatedly, plodded on. sand, stone, winds, and the sky more             
orange then, a slate-like crop of clouds toward which the sun was                 
heading…                                                                          
then long shadows, the dying of the wind, stillness… only the click of            
hoof on rock and the sounds of breathing… dimness, as they rushed                 
together and the sun is foiled by clouds… the walls of the day shaken by          
thunder… an unnatural clarity of distant objects… a cool, blue, and               
electric feeling in the air… thunder again…                                       
now, a rippling, glassy curtain to my right as the rain advances… blue            
fracture lines within the clouds… the temperature plummeting, our pace            
steady, the world a monochromatic backdrop now… gouging thunder,                  
flashing white, the curtain flaring toward us now… two hundred meters…            
one-fifty… enough!                                                                
its bottommost edge plowing, furrowing, frothing… the moist smell of              
the earth… star’s whinny… a burst of speed… small rivulets of water               
creeping outward, sinking, staining the ground… now bubbling muddily,             
now trickling… now a steady flow… streamlets all about us, splashing…             
high ground ahead, and star’s muscles bunching and relaxing, bunching             
and relaxing beneath me, as he leaps the rills and freshets, plunges through      
a racing, roiling sheet, and strikes the slope, hoofs sparkling against stones    
as we mount higher, the voice of the gurgling, eddying flow beneath us            
deepening to a steady roar… higher, then, and dry, pausing to wring out the       
corners of my cloak… below, behind, and to the right a gray, storm-tossed         
sea laps at the foot of the cliff we hold… inland now, toward clover fields       
and evening, the boom of the surf at my back… pursuing falling stars into         
the darkening east and eventual silence and night… clear the sky and bright       
the stars, but a few small wisps of cloud… a howling pack of red-eyed             
things, twisting along our trail… shadow… green-eyed… shadow…                     
yellow… shadow… gone…                                                             
but dark peaks with skirts of snow, jostling one another about me…                
frozen snow, as dry as dust, lifted in waves by the icy blasts of the             
heights… powdery snow, flour-like… memory here, of the italian alps, of           
skiing… waves of snow drifting across stone faces… a white fire within            
the night air… my feet rapidly numbing within my wet boots… star                  
bewildered and snorting, testing each step and shaking his head as if in          
disbelief… so shadows beyond the rock, a gentler slope, a drying wind, less       
snow… a twisting trail, a corkscrew trail, an adit into warmth… down,             
down, down the night, beneath the changing stars… far the snows of an             
hour ago, now scrubby plants and level plain… far, and the night birds            
stagger into the air, wheeling above the carrion feast, shedding hoarse notes     
of protest as we pass… slow again, to the place where the grasses wave,           
stirred by the less cold breeze… the cough of a hunting cat… the shadowy          
flight of a bounding, deer-like beast… stars sliding into place and feelings      
in my feet once more…                                                             
star rearing, neighing, racing ahead from some unseen thing… a long               
time in the soothing then, and longer still till the shivers go… now icicles      
of a partial moon falling on distant treetops… moist earth exhaling a             
luminescent mist… moths dancing in the night light… the ground                    
momentarily buckling and swaying, as if mountains were shifting their             
feet… to every star its double… a halo round the dumbbell moon… the               
plain, the air above it, filled with fleeting shapes… the earth, a wound-         
down clock, ticks and grows still… stability… inertia… the stars and the          
moon reunited with their spirits… skirting the growing fringe of trees,           
west… impressions of a sleeping jungle: delirium of serpents under oil            
cloth…                                                                            
west, west… somewhere a river with broad, clean banks to ease my                  
passage to the sea… thud of hoofs, shuttling of shadows… the night air            
upon my face… a glimpse of bright beings on high, dark walls, shining             
towers… the air is sweetened… vision swims… shadows… we are                       
merged, centaur-like. star and i, under a single skin of sweat… we take the       
air and give it back in mutual explosions of exertion… neck clothed in            
thunder, terrible the glory of the nostrils… swallowing the ground…               
laughing, the smell of the waters upon us, the trees very near to our left…       
then among them… sleek bark, hanging vines, broad leaves, droplets of             
moisture… spider web in the moonlight, struggling shapes within…                  
spongy turf… phosphorent fungus on fallen trees… a clear space… long              
grasses rustling… more trees… again, the riversmell… sounds, later…               
sounds… the grassy chuckling of water… closer, louder, beside it at               
last… the heavens buckling and bending in its belly, and the trees… clean,        
with a cold, damp tang… leftward beside it, pacing it now… easy and               
flowing, we follow…                                                               
to drink… splashing in its shallows, then hockhigh with head                      
depressed, star, in it, drinking like a pump, blasting spray from his             
nostrils… upriver, it laps at my boots… dripping from my hair, running            
down my arms… star’s head turning, at the laughter… then downriver                
again, clean, slow, winding… then straight, widening, slowing…                    
trees thickening, then thinning… long, steady, slow… a faint light in             
the east… sloping downward now, and fewer trees… rockier, and the                 
darkness made whole once again… the first, dim hint of the sea, lost an           
odor later… clicking on, on, in the nightsend chill… again, an instant’s          
salt… rock, and an absence of trees… hard, steep, bleak, down… ever-              
increasing precipitousness… flashing between walls of stone… dislodged            
pebbles vanishing in the now racing current, their splashes drowned in the        
roar’s echoes… deeper the defile, widening… down, down… farther                   
still… now pale once more the east, gentler the slope… again, the touch of        
salt, stronger… shale and grit… around a comer, down, and brighter still…         
steady, soft and loose the footing… the breeze and the light, the breeze and      
the light… beyond a crop of rock… draw rein.                                      
below me lay the stark seaboard, where rank upon rank of rolling                  
dunes, harassed by the winds out of the southwest, tossed spumes of sand          
that partly obliterated the distant outlines of the bleak morning sea.            
i watched the pink film spread across the water from the east. here and           
there, the shifting sands revealed dark patches of gravel. rugged masses of       
rock reared above the swell of the waves. between the massive dunes—              
hundreds of feet in height—and myself, there high above that evil coast, lay      
a smashed and pitted plain of angular rocks and gravel, just now emerging         
from hell or night into dawn’s first glow, and alive with shadows.                
yes, it was right.                                                                
i dismounted and watched the sun force a bleak and glaring day upon               
the prospect. it was the hard, white light i had sought. here, sans humans,       
was the necessary place, just as i had seen it decades earlier on the shadow      
earth of my exile. no bulldozers, sifters, broom-wielding blacks; no              
maximum-security city of oranjemund. no x-ray machines, barbed wire,              
or armed guards. none of these things here. no. for this shadow had never         
known a sir ernest oppenheimer, and there had never been a consolidated           
diamond mines of south west africa, nor a government to approve their             
amalgamation of coastal mining interests. here was the desert called namib        
in that place some four hundred miles to the northwest of cape town, a            
strip of dunes and rocks ranging from a couple to a dozen miles in width          
and running along that forsaken coast line for perhaps three hundred miles        
on the seaward side of the richtersveld mountains, within whose shadow i          
now stood. here, unlike any conventional mine, the diamonds were                  
scattered as casually as bird droppings across the sand. i, of course, had        
brought along a rake and a sieve.                                                 
i broke out the rations and prepared breakfast. it was going to be a hot,         
dusty day.                                                                        
as i worked the dunes, i thought of doyle, the little wispy-haired                
jeweler with the brick-red complexion and wens on his cheeks, back in             
avalon. jewelers rouge? why did i want all that jewelers rouge—enough to          
supply an army of jewelers for a dozen lifetimes? i had shrugged. what was        
it to him what i wanted it for, so long as i was able to pay for it? well, if     
there was some new use for the stuff and good money to be made, a man             
would be a fool… in other words, he would be unable to furnish me with            
such a quantity within a week? small, square chuckles had escaped through         
the gaps in his smile. a week? oh, no! of course not! that was ridiculous,        
out of the question… i saw. well, a quick thanks and perhaps his competitor       
up the way might be able to produce the stuff, and might also be interested       
in a few uncut diamonds i was expecting in a matter of days… diamonds,            
did i say? wait. he was always interested in diamonds himself… yes, but           
he was sadly deficient in the jewelers rouge department. a raised hand. it        
might be that he had spoken hastily with respect to his ability to produce the    
polishing material. it was the quantity that had disturbed him. but the           
ingredients were plentiful and the formula fairly simple. yes, that was no        
real reason why something could not be worked out. within a week, at that.        
now, about the diamonds…                                                          
before i left his shop, something had been worked out.                            
i have met many persons who thought that gunpowder explodes, which                
of course is incorrect. it burns rapidly, building up gas pressure which ejects   
a bullet from the mouth of a shell and drives it through the barrel of a          
weapon, after having been ignited by the primer, which does the actual            
exploding when the firing pin is driven into it. now, with typical family         
foresight, i had experimented with a variety of combustibles over the years.      
my disappointment at the discovery that gunpowder would not ignite in             
amber, and that all of the primers i tested were equally inert there, was a       
thing mitigated only by the knowledge that none of my relatives could bring       
firearms into amber either. it was much later, during a visit to amber, after     
polishing a bracelet i had brought for deirdre, that i discovered this            
wonderful property of jewelers rouge from avalon when i disposed of the           
polishing cloth in a fireplace. fortunately, the quantity involved was small,     
and i was alone at the time.                                                      
it made an excellent primer, straight from the container. when cut with           
a sufficient quantity of inert material, it could also be made to burn            
properly.                                                                         
i kept this bit of information to myself, feeling that one day it would be        
used to decide certain basic issues in amber. unfortunately, eric and i had       
our run-in before that day arrived and it went into storage along with all my     
other memories. when things finally did clear for me, my fortunes were            
quickly cast with those of bleys, who was preparing an assault on amber.          
he had not really needed me then, but had taken me in on the enterprise, i        
feel, so that he could keep an eye on me. had i furnished him with guns, he       
would have been invincible and i would have been unnecessary. more                
important, had we succeeded in seizing amber in accordance with his               
plans, the situation would have become strained indeed, with the bulk of the      
occupying forces, as well as the officers‘ loyalty, his. then i would have        
required something to adjust the balance of power more equitably. a few           
bombs and automatic weapons, say.                                                 
had i been my whole self even a month earlier, things would have been             
quite different. i could have been sitting in amber, rather than being            
scorched, abraded, and desiccated, with another hellride before me and a          
knot of troubles to be worked out after that.                                     
i spat sand so that i would not choke when i laughed. hell, we make our           
own ifs. i had better things to think about than what could have happened.        
like eric…                                                                        
i remember that day, eric. i was in chains and i had been forced to my            
knees before the throne. i had already crowned myself, to mock you, and           
been beaten for it. the second time i had the crown in my hands, i threw it       
at you. but you caught it and smiled. i was glad that it was not damaged          
when it failed to damage you. such a beautiful thing… all of silver, with its     
seven high points, and studded with emeralds to beat all diamonds. two            
large rubies at either temple… you crowned yourself that day, all arrogance       
and hasty pomp. the first words that you spoke then were whispered to me,         
before the echoes of “long live the king!” had died within the hall. i            
remember every one of them. “your eyes have looked upon the fairest sight         
they ever will behold,” you said. then, “guards!” you ordered. “take              
corwin away to the smithy, and let his eyes be burnt from out his head! let       
him remember the sights of this day as the last he might ever see! then cast      
him into the darkness of the deepest dungeon beneath amber, and let his           
name be forgotten!”                                                               
“now you reign in amber,” i said aloud. “but i have my eyes, and i                
have neither forgotten nor been forgotten.”                                       
no, i thought. wrap yourself in the kingship, eric. the walls of amber            
are high and thick. stay behind them. ring yourself with the futile steel of      
blades. antlike, you armor your house in dust. you know now that you will         
never be secure so long as i live, and i have told you that i will be back. i     
am coming, eric. i will bring me up guns out of avalon, and i will break          
down your doors and smite your defenders. then it will be as it was, briefly,     
another time, before your men came to you and saved you. that day i had           
only a few drops of your blood. this time, i will have it all.                    
i uncovered another rough diamond, the sixteenth or so, and flipped it            
into the sack at my waist.                                                        
as i faced the setting sun, i wondered about benedict, julian, and                
gerard. what was the connection? whatever, i did not like any combination         
of interests which involved julian. gerard was all right. i had been able to      
sleep back at the camp when i had thought that it was he whom benedict            
was contacting. if he was now allied with julian, though, it was cause for        
increased uneasiness. if anyone hated me even more than eric, it was              
julian. if he knew where i was, then my danger was great. i was not yet           
ready for a confrontation.                                                        
i supposed benedict could find a moral justification for selling me out           
at this point. after all, he knew that whatever i did—and he knew that i was      
going to do something—would result in strife in amber. i could understand,        
even sympathize with, his feelings. he was dedicated to the preservation of       
the realm. unlike julian, he was a man of principle, and i regretted having       
to be at odds with him. my hope was that my coup would be as quick and            
painless as a tooth extraction under gas, and that we would be back on the        
same side again soon afterward. having met dara now, i also wanted it this        
way for her sake.                                                                 
he had told me too little for comfort. i had no way of knowing whether            
he really intended to remain in the field the entire week, or whether he was      
even now cooperating with the forces of amber in the laying of my trap, the       
walling of my prison, the digging of my grave. i had to hurry, though i           
longed to linger in avalon.                                                       
i envied ganelon, in whatever tavern or brothel he drank, whored, or              
fought, on whatever hillside he hunted. he had come home. should i leave          
him to his pleasures, despite his offer to accompany me to amber? but no,         
he would be questioned on my departure—used badly, if julian had                  
anything to do with it—and then become an outcast in what must seem his           
own land to him, if they let him go at all. then he would doubtless become        
an outlaw again, and the third time would probably prove his undoing. no, i       
would keep my promise. he would come with me, if that was he still                
wanted. if he had changed his mind, well—i even envied him the prospect           
of outlawry in avalon. i would have liked to remain longer, to ride with          
dara in the hills, tramp about the countryside, sail upon the rivers…             
i thought about the girl. the knowledge of her existence changed things           
somewhat. i was not certain how. despite our major hatreds and petty              
animosities, we amberites are a very family-conscious bunch, always eager         
for news of one another, desirous to know everyone’s position in the              
changing picture. a pause for gossip has doubtless stayed a few death             
blows among us. i sometimes think of us as a gang of mean little old ladies       
in a combination rest home and obstacle course.                                   
i could not fit dara into things yet because she did not know where she           
fit herself. oh, she would learn eventually. she would receive superb             
tutelage once her existence became known. now that i had brought her              
awareness of her uniqueness it would only be a matter of time before this         
occurred and she joined in the games. i had felt somewhat serpent-like at         
points during our conversation in the grove—but hell, she had a right to          
know. she was bound to find out sooner or later, and the sooner she did the       
sooner she could start shoring up her defenses. it was for her own benefit.       
of course, it was possible—even likely—that her mother and                        
grandmother had lived their lives in ignorance of their heritage…                 
and where had it gotten them? they died violently, she had said.                  
was it possible, i wondered, that the long arm of amber had reached for           
them out of shadow? and that it might strike again?                               
benedict could be as tough and mean and nasty as any of us when he                
wanted to be. tougher, even. he would fight to protect his own, doubtless         
even kill one of us if he thought it necessary. he must have assumed that         
keeping her existence a secret and keeping her ignorant would protect her.        
he would be angry with me when he found out what i had done, which was            
another reason for clearing out in a hurry. but i had not told her what i had     
out of sheer perverseness. i wanted her to survive, and i did not feel he was     
handling things properly. when i returned, she would have had time to             
think things over. she would have many questions and i would seize the            
opportunity to caution her at length and to give specifics.                       
i gnashed my teeth.                                                               
none of this should be necessary. when i ruled in amber, things would             
be different. they had to be…                                                     
why had no one ever come up with a way to change the basic nature of              
man? even the erasure of all my memories and a new life in a new world            
had resulted in the same old corwin. if i were not happy with what i was it       
could be a proposition worthy of despair.                                         
in a quiet part of the river, i washed away the dust, the sweat,                  
wondering the while about the black road which had so injured my brothers.        
there were many things that i needed to know.                                     
as i bathed, grayswandir was never far from my hand. one of us is                 
capable of tracking another through shadow, when the trail is still warm. as      
it was, my bath was undisturbed, though i used grayswandir three times on         
the way back, on less mundane things than brothers.                               
but this was to be expected, as i had accelerated the pace                        
considerably…                                                                     
it was still dark, though dawn was not too far away, when i entered the           
stables at my brother’s manor. i tended star, who had grown somewhat              
wild, talking to him and soothing him as i rubbed him down, then putting          
out a good supply of food and water. ganelon’s firedrake greeted me from          
the opposite stall. i cleaned up at the pump to the rear of the stable, trying to 
decide where i was going to catch a little sleep.                                 
i needed some rest. a few hours‘ worth would hold me for a time, but i            
refused to take them beneath benedict’s roof. i would not be taken that           
easily, and while i had often said that i wanted to die in bed, what i really     
meant was that in my old age i wanted to be stepped on by an elephant             
while making love.                                                                
i was not averse to drinking his booze, though, and i wanted a belt of            
something strong. the manor was dark; i entered quietly and i found the           
sideboard.                                                                        
i poured a stiff one, tossed it off, poured another, and carried it to the        
window. i could see for a great distance. the manor stood on a hillside and       
benedict had landscaped the place well.                                           
“ ‘white in the moon the long road lies,’ ” i recited, surprised at the           
sound of my own voice. “ ‘the moon stands blank above…’ ”                         
“so it does. so it does, corwin my lad,” i heard ganelon say.                     
“i didn’t see you sitting there,” i said softly, not turning from the             
window.                                                                           
“that’s because i’m sitting so still,” he said.                                   
“oh,” i said. “how drunk are you?”                                                
“hardly at all,” he said, “now. but if you would care to be a good fellow         
and fetch me a drink…”                                                            
i turned.                                                                         
“why can’t you get your own?”                                                     
“it hurts to move.”                                                               
“all right.”                                                                      
i went and poured him one, carried it to him. he raised it slowly,                
nodded his thanks, took a sip.                                                    
“ah, that’s good!” he sighed. “may it numb things a bit”                          
“you were in a fight,” i decided.                                                 
“aye,” he said. “several.”                                                        
“then bear your wounds like a good trooper and let me save my                     
sympathy.”                                                                        
“but i won!”                                                                      
“god! where did you leave the bodies?”                                            
“oh, they are not that bad off. twas a girl did this to me.”                      
“then i’d say you got your money’s worth.”                                        
“ ‘twas not that sort of thing at all. i believe i’ve embarrassed us.”            
“us? how?”                                                                        
“i did not know she was the lady of the house. i came in feeling jolly,           
and i thought her some serving wench…”                                            
“dara?” i said, tensing.                                                          
“aye, the same. i slapped her on the rump and went for a kiss or two—”            
he groaned. “then she picked me up. she raised me off the ground and              
held me up over her head. then she told me she was the lady of the house.         
then she let me fall… i’m eighteen stone if i’m a pebble, man, and it was a       
long way down.” he took another drink, and i chuckled.                            
“she laughed, too,” he said ruefully. “she helped me up then and was              
not unkind, and of course i apologized—that brother of yours must be              
quite a man. i never met a girl that strong. the things she could do to a         
man…” there was awe in his voice. he shook his head slowly and tossed             
back the rest of his drink. “it was frightening—not to mention                    
embarrassing,” he concluded.                                                      
“she accepted your apology?”                                                      
“oh, yes. she was quite gracious about the whole thing. she told me to            
forget all about it, and said that she would, too.”                               
“then why are you not in bed sleeping it off?”                                    
“i was waiting up, in case you came in at an odd hour. i wanted to catch          
you right away.”                                                                  
“well, you have.”                                                                 
he rose slowly and picked up his glass.                                           
“let’s go outside,” he said.                                                      
“good idea.”                                                                      
he picked up the brandy decanter on the way out, which i also thought             
was a good idea, and we followed a path through the garden behind the             
house. finally, he heaved himself onto an old stone bench at the foot of a        
large oak tree, where he refilled both our glasses and took a drink from his      
own.                                                                              
“ah! he has good taste in liquor, too, your brother.” be said.                    
i seated myself beside him and filled my pipe.                                    
“after i told her i was sorry and introduced myself, we got to talking for        
a time,” he said. “as soon as she learned i was with you, she wanted to           
know all sorts of things about amber and shadows and you and the rest of          
your family.”                                                                     
“did you tell her anything?” i said, striking a light.                            
“couldn’t have if i wanted to,” he said. “i had none of the answers.”             
“good.”                                                                           
“it got me to thinking, though. i do not believe benedict tells her too           
much, and i can see why. i would be careful what i say around her, corwin.        
she seems over-curious.”                                                          
i nodded, puffing.                                                                
“there is a reason for it,” i said. “a very good reason. i am glad to             
know, though, that you keep your wits about you even when you have been           
drinking. thanks for telling me.”                                                 
he shrugged and took a drink.                                                     
“a good bashing is a sobering thing. also, your welfare is my welfare.”           
“true. does this version of avalon meet with your approval?”                      
“version? it is my avalon,” he said. “a new generation of people is in            
the land, but it is the same place. i visited the field of thorns today, where i  
put down jack hailey’s bunch in your service. it was the same place.”             
“the field of thorns…” i said, remembering.                                       
“yes, this is my avalon,” he continued, “and i’ll be coming back here             
for my old age, if we live trough amber.”                                         
“you still want to come along?”                                                   
“all my life i’ve wanted to see amber—well, since i first heard of it.            
that was from you, in happier times.”                                             
“i do not really remember what i said. it must have been a good                   
telling.”                                                                         
“we were both wonderfully drunk that night, and it seemed but a brief             
while that you talked—weeping some of the time—telling me of the mighty           
mountain kolvir and the green and golden spires of the city, of the               
promenades, the decks, the terraces, the flowers, the fountains… it seemed        
but a brief while, but it was most of the night—for before we staggered off       
to bed, the morning had begun. god! i could almost draw you a map of the          
place! i must see it before i die.”                                               
“i do not remember that night,” i said slowly. “i must have been very,            
very drunk.”                                                                      
he chuckled.                                                                      
“we had some good times here in the old days,” he said. “and they do              
remember us here. but as people who lived very long ago—and they have             
many of the stories wrong. but hell! how many people get their stories            
right from day to day?”                                                           
i said nothing, smoking, thinking back.                                           
“…all of which leads me to a question or two,” he said.                           
“shoot.”                                                                          
“will your attack on amber put you at great odds with your brother                
benedict?”                                                                        
“i really wish that i knew the answer to that one,” i said. “i think that it      
will, initially. but my move should be completed before he can reach              
amber from here, in response to any distress call that goes out. that is,         
reach amber with reinforcements. he could get there in no time at all,            
personally, if someone on the other end were helping. but that would serve        
little purpose. no. rather than tear amber apart, he will support whoever         
can hold it together, i am certain. once i have ousted eric, he will want the     
strife to stop right there and he will go along with my holding the throne,       
just to put an end to it. he will not really approve of the seizure in the first  
place, of course.”                                                                
“that is what i am getting at. will there be bad blood between you                
afterward as a result of that?”                                                   
“i do not believe so. this is purely a matter of politics, and we have            
known one another most of our lives, he and i, and have always been on            
better terms with each other than either of us with eric.”                        
“i see. since you and i are in this together and avalon seems to be               
benedict’s now, i was wondering what his feelings would be about my               
returning here one day. would he hate me for having helped you?”                  
“i doubt that very much. he has never been that sort of person.”                  
“then let me carry things a step further. god knows i am an                       
experienced military man, and if we succeed in taking amber he will have          
ample evidence of the fact, with his right arm injured the way that it is and     
all, do you think he might consider taking me on as a field commander for         
his militia? i know this area so well. i could take him to the field of thorns    
and describe that battle. hell! i would serve him well—as well as i served        
you.”                                                                             
he laughed then.                                                                  
“pardon me. better than i served you.”                                            
i chuckled, sipped my drink.                                                      
“it would be tricky,” i said. “of course i like the idea. but i am not too        
certain that you could ever enjoy his trust. it would seem too obvious a ploy     
on my part.”                                                                      
“damn politics! that is not what i meant! soldiering is all that i know,          
and i love avalon!”                                                               
“i believe you. but would he?”                                                    
“with only one arm he will be needing a good man about. he could—”                
i began to laugh and restrained myself quickly, for the sound of laughter         
seems to carry for a good distance. also, ganelon’s feelings were involved.       
“i am sorry,” i said. “excuse me, please. you do not understand. you do           
not really understand who it was we talked with in the tent that night. he        
may have seemed an ordinary man to you—a handicapped one, at that. but            
this is not so. i fear benedict. he is unlike any other being in shadow or        
reality. he is the master of arms for amber. can you conceive of a                
millennium? a thousand years? several of them? can you understand a               
man who, for almost every day of a lifetime like that, has spent some time        
dwelling with weapons, tactics, strategies? because you see him in a tiny         
kingdom, commanding a small militia, with a well-pruned orchard in his            
back yard, do not be deceived. all that there is of military science thunders     
in his head. he has often journeyed from shadow to shadow, witnessing             
variation after variation on the same battle, with but slightly altered           
circumstances, in order to test his theories of warfare. he has commanded         
armies so vast that you could watch them march by day after day and see no        
end to the columns. although he is inconvenienced by the loss of his arm, i       
would not wish to fight with him either with weapons or barehanded. it is         
fortunate that he has no designs upon the throne, or he would be occupying        
it right now. if he were, i believe that i would give up at this moment and       
pay him homage. i fear benedict.”                                                 
ganelon was silent for a long while, and i took another drink, for my             
throat had become dry.                                                            
“i did not realize this, of course,” he said then. “i will be happy if he         
just lets me come back to avalon.”                                                
“that much he will do. i know.”                                                   
“dara told me she had a message from him today. he has decided to cut             
short his stay in the field. he will probably be returning tomorrow.”             
“damn!” i said, standing. “we will have to move soon, then. i hope                
doyle has that stuff ready. we must go to him in the morning and expedite         
matters. i want to be away from here before benedict gets back!”                  
“you have the pretties then?”                                                     
“yes.”                                                                            
“may i see them?”                                                                 
i undid the sack at my belt and passed it to him. he opened it and                
withdrew several stones, holding them in the palm of his left hand and            
turning them slowly with his fingertips.                                          
“they do not look like much,” he said, “from what i can see of them in            
this light. wait! there’s a glimmer! no…”                                         
“they are in the rough, of course. you are holding a fortune in your              
hands.”                                                                           
“amazing,” he said, dropping them back in the sack and refastening it.            
“it was so easy for you.”                                                         
“it was not all that easy.”                                                       
“still, to gather a fortune so quickly seems somehow unfair.”                     
he passed it back.                                                                
“i will see that you are provided with a fortune when our labors are              
done,” i said. “that should prove some compensation, should benedict not          
offer you a position.”                                                            
“now that i know who he is, i am more determined than ever to work                
for him one day.”                                                                 
“we will see what can be done.”                                                   
“yes. thank you, corwin. how shall we work our departure?”                        
“i want you to go and get some rest, for i will roust you out of bed early.       
star and firedrake will take unkindly to the notion of draft duty, i fear, but    
we will then borrow one of benedict’s wagons and head into town. before           
this, i will try to arrange a good smoke screen here for our orderly              
withdrawal. we will then hurry doyle the jeweler about his task, obtain our       
cargo, and depart into shadow as quickly as possible. the greater our head        
start, the more difficult it will be for benedict to track us. if i can get half a
day’s lead into shadow, it will be practically impossible for him.”               
“why should he be so eager to come after us in the first place?”                  
“he does not trust me worth a damn—and justly so. he is waiting for               
me to make my move. he knows there is something i need here, but he does          
not know what. he wants to find out, so that he can seal off another threat       
to amber. as soon as he realizes we have gone for good, he will know that         
we have it and he will come looking.”                                             
ganelon yawned, stretched, finished his drink.                                    
“yes,” he said then. “we’d best rest now, to be in condition for the              
hurrying. now that you have told me more about benedict, i am less                
surprised by the other thing i meant to tell you—though no less                   
discomfited.”                                                                     
“that being…?”                                                                    
he rose to his feet, picked up the decanter carefully, then pointed down          
the path.                                                                         
“if you continue on in that direction,” he said, “passing the hedge that          
marks the end of this bower and entering the woods that lie below—and             
then go on for another two hundred paces or so—you will come to a place           
where there is a little grove of saplings off to the left, standing in a sudden   
declivity perhaps four feet lower than the level of the trail itself. down in it, 
stamped down and strewn over with leaves and twigs, there is a fresh grave.       
i found it while taking the air earlier, when i paused to relieve myself down     
there.”                                                                           
“how do you know it is a grave?”                                                  
he chuckled.                                                                      
“when holes have bodies in them that is how they are generally called.            
it was quite shallow, and i poked around a bit with a stick. there are four       
bodies in there—three men and a woman.”                                           
“how recently dead?”                                                              
“very. a few days. i’d judge.”                                                    
“you left it as you found it?”                                                    
“i’m not a fool, corwin.”                                                         
“sorry. but this troubles me considerably, because i don’t understand it          
at all.”                                                                          
“obviously they gave benedict some trouble and he returned the favor.”            
“perhaps. what were they like? how did they die?”                                 
“nothing special about them. they were in their middle years, and their           
throats had been cut—save for one fellow who got it in the guts.”                 
“strange. yes, it is good that we are leaving soon. we have enough                
problems of our own without getting involved in the local ones.”                  
“agreed. so let us be off to bed.”                                                
“you go ahead. i am not quite ready yet.”                                         
“take your own advice and get some rest,” he said, turning back toward            
the manor. “don’t sit up and worry.”                                              
“i won’t.”                                                                        
“good night, then.”                                                               
“see you in the morning.”                                                         
i watched him return along the path. he was right, of course, but i was           
not yet ready to surrender my consciousness. i went over my plans again, to       
be certain there was nothing i was overlooking, finished my drink and set         
the glass on the bench. i rose then and strolled, trailing wisps of tobacco       
smoke about me. there was a bit of moonlight from over my shoulder and            
dawn was still a few hours‘ distant, as i reckoned it. i was firm in my           
resolve to spend the rest of the night out of doors, and i thought to find me a   
good place to sack out.                                                           
of course, i eventually wandered down the path and into the grove of              
saplings. a little poking around showed me that there had been some recent        
digging, but i was in no mood to exhume bodies by moonlight and was               
perfectly willing to take ganelon’s word as to what he had found there. i am      
not even certain why i went there. morbid streak, i guess. i did decide           
against sleeping in the vicinity, though.                                         
i made my way into the northwest corner of the garden, finding an area            
that was out of line of sight from the manor. there were high hedgerows           
and the grass was long, soft, and sweet-smelling. i spread my cloak, sat          
down upon it, and pulled off my boots. i put my feet down into the cool           
grass and sighed.                                                                 
not too much longer, i decided. shadows to diamonds to guns to                    
amber. i was on my way. a year ago i had been rotting in a cell, crossing         
and recrossing the line between sanity and madness so many times that i           
had all but rubbed it out. now i was free, strong, sighted, and had a plan.       
now i was a threat seeking fulfillment once again, a deadlier threat than i       
had been previously. this time i did not have my fortunes tied up with the        
plans of another. now i was responsible for my own success or failure.            
the feeling was good, as was the grass, as was the alcohol which had              
now seeped through my system and warmed me with a pleasant flame. i               
cleaned my pipe, put it away, stretched, yawned, and was about to recline.        
i detected a distant movement, propped myself on my elbows and                    
watched for it again. i did not have long to wait. a figure was passing           
slowly along the path, pausing frequently, moving quietly. it vanished            
beneath the tree where ganelon and i had been sitting, and did not emerge         
again for a long while. then it continued on for several dozen paces,             
stopped and seemed to be staring in my direction. then it advanced toward         
me.                                                                               
passing about a clump of shrubbery and emerging from the shadows,                 
her face was suddenly touched by the moonlight. apparently aware of this,         
she smiled in my direction, slowing as she came near, stopping when she           
stood before me.                                                                  
she said, “i take it your quarters are not to your liking, lord corwin.”          
“not at all,” i said. “it is such a beautiful night that it appealed to the       
outdoorsman in me.”                                                               
“something must have appealed to you last night, also,” she said,                 
“despite the rain,” and she seated herself beside me on my cloak. “did you        
sleep indoors or out?”                                                            
“i spent it out,” i said. “but i did not sleep. in fact, i have not slept since   
i saw you last.”                                                                  
“where have you been?”                                                            
“down by the seaside, sifting sand.”                                              
“sounds depressing.”                                                              
“it was.”                                                                         
“i have been doing a lot of thinking, since we walked in shadow.”                 
“i would imagine.”                                                                
“i have not done too much sleeping either. that was why i heard you               
come in, heard you talking with ganelon, knew you were out here                   
somewhere when he came back alone.”                                               
“you were right.”                                                                 
“i must get to amber, you know. and walk the pattern.”                            
“i know. you will.”                                                               
“soon, corwin. soon!”                                                             
“you are young, dara. there is plenty of time.”                                   
“damn it! i have been waiting all my life—without even knowing about              
it! is there no way i can go now?”                                                
“no.”                                                                             
“why not? you could take me on a quick journey through shadows, take              
me to amber, let me walk the pattern…”                                            
“if we are not slain immediately, we might be fortunate enough to be              
given adjoining cells for a time—or racks—before we are executed.”                
“whatever for? you are a prince of the city. you have a right to do as            
you please.”                                                                      
i laughed.                                                                        
“i am an outlaw, dear. if i return to amber i will be executed, if i am           
lucky. or something much worse if i am not. but seeing as how things              
turned out last time, i should think they would kill me quickly. this             
courtesy would doubtless also be extended to my companions.”                      
“oberon would not do such a thing.”                                               
“given sufficient provocation, i believe that he would. but the question          
does not really arise. oberon is no more, and my brother eric sits on the         
throne and calls himself liege.”                                                  
“when did this occur?”                                                            
“several years ago, as time is measured in amber.”                                
“why would he want to kill you?”                                                  
“to keep me from killing him, of course.”                                         
“would you?”                                                                      
“yes, and i will. soon, too, i think.”                                            
she turned to face me then.                                                       
“why?”                                                                            
“so that i can occupy the throne myself. it is rightly mine, you see. eric        
has usurped it. i am just recently escaped from torture and several years‘        
imprisonment at his hands. he made the mistake, however, of allowing              
himself the luxury of keeping me alive so that he could contemplate my            
wretchedness. he never thought that i would get free and return to                
challenge him again. neither did i, for that matter. but since i have been        
fortunate enough to obtain a second chance, i shall be careful not to make        
the same mistake he did.”                                                         
“but he is your brother.”                                                         
“few are more aware of that fact than he and i, i assure you.”                    
“how soon do you expect to accomplish—your objectives?”                           
“as i said the other day, if you can get hold of the trumps, contact me           
in about three months. if you cannot, and things come about according to          
my plans, i will get in touch with you fairly early in my reign. you should       
have your chance to take the pattern before another year passes.”                 
“and if you fail?”                                                                
“then you will have a longer wait ahead of you. until eric has assured            
the permanency of his own reign, and until benedict has acknowledged him          
king. you see, benedict is not willing to do this. he has remained away           
from amber for a long while, and for all eric knows, he is no longer among        
the living. should he put in an appearance now, he is going to have to take a     
position either for or against eric. should he come out for him, then the         
continuance of eric’s reign will be assured—and benedict does not want to         
be responsible for that. should he come out against him, there will be strife     
—and he does not want to be responsible for that either. he has no desire         
for the crown himself. only by remaining out of the picture entirely can he       
assure the measure of tranquility that does prevail. were he to appear and        
refuse to take either position, he could possibly get away with it, but it        
would be tantamount to denying eric’s kingship and would still lead to            
trouble. were he to appear with you, he would be surrendering his will, for       
eric would put pressure on him through you.”                                      
“then if you lose i might never get to amber!”                                    
“i am only describing the situation as i see it. there are doubtless many         
factors of which i am unaware. i have been out of circulation for a long          
while.”                                                                           
“you must win!” she said. then, suddenly, “would grandpa support                  
you?”                                                                             
“i doubt it. but the situation would be quite different. i am aware of his        
existence, and of yours. i will not ask his support. so long as he does not       
oppose me, i will be satisfied. and if i am quick, efficient, and successful,     
he will not oppose me. he will not like my having found out about you, but        
when he sees that i mean you no harm all will be well on that count.”             
“why would you not use me? it seems the logical thing to do.”                     
“it is. but i’ve discovered i like you,” i said, “so that’s out of the            
question.” she laughed.                                                           
“i’ve charmed you!” she said. i chuckled.                                         
“in your own delicate way, at sword’s point, yes.”                                
abruptly, she sobered.                                                            
“grandpa is coming back tomorrow,” she said. “did your man ganelon                
tell you?”                                                                        
“yes.”                                                                            
“how does that affect whatever you are about?”                                    
“i intend to be hell and gone out of here before he returns.”                     
“what will he do?”                                                                
“the first thing that he will do will be to get very angry with you for           
being here. then he will want to know how you managed your return and             
how much you have told me about yourself.”                                        
“what should i tell him?”                                                         
“tell him the truth about how you got back. that will give him                    
something to think about. as to your status, your woman’s intuition               
cautioned you concerning my trustworthiness, and you took the same line           
with me as you did with julian and gerard. as to my whereabouts, ganelon          
and i borrowed a wagon and headed into town, saying that we would not be          
back until quite late.”                                                           
“where will you really be going?”                                                 
“into town, briefly. but we will not be coming back. i want as much of            
a head start as possible because he can track me through shadow, up to a          
point.”                                                                           
“i will delay him as best i can for you. were you not going to see me             
before you left?”                                                                 
“i was going to have this talk with you in the morning. you got it ahead          
of time by being restless.”                                                       
“then i am glad that i was—restless. how are you going to conquer                 
amber?”                                                                           
i shook my head. “no, dear dara. all scheming princes must keep a few             
small secrets. that’s one of mine.”                                               
“i am surprised to learn there is so much distrust and plotting in                
amber.”                                                                           
“why? the same conflicts exist everywhere, in various forms. they are             
all about you, always, for all places take their form from amber.”                
“it is difficult to understand…”                                                  
“one day you will. leave it at that for now.”                                     
“then tell me another thing. since i am able to negotiate shadows                 
somewhat, even without having taken the pattern, tell me more precisely           
how you go about it. i want to get better at it.”                                 
“no!” i said. “i will not have you fooling with shadow until you are              
ready. it is dangerous even after you have taken the pattern. to do it before     
is foolhardy. you were lucky, but do not try it again. i’ll even help, by not     
telling you anything more about it.”                                              
“all right!” she said. “sorry. i guess i can wait”                                
“i guess you can. no hard feelings?”                                              
“no. well—” she laughed. “they wouldn’t do me any good, i guess.                  
you must know what you are talking about. i am glad that you care what            
happens to me.”                                                                   
i grunted, and she reached out and touched my cheek. at this, i turned            
my head again and her face was moving slowly toward my own, smile gone            
and lips parting, eyes almost closed. as we kissed, i felt her arms slide         
about my neck and shoulders and mine found their way into a similar               
position around her. my surprise was lost in the sweetness, gave way to           
warmth and a certain excitement.                                                  
if benedict ever found out, he was going to be more than just irritated           
with me…                                                                          
                                                                     
chapter 7                                                                         
the wagon creaked, monotonously, and the sun was already well into the            
west, though it still poured hot streams of daylight upon us. back among the      
cases, ganelon snored, and i envied him his noisy occupation. he had been         
sleeping for several hours, and this was my third day without rest.               
we were perhaps fifteen miles out of the city, and heading into the               
northeast. doyle had not had my order completely ready, but ganelon and i         
had persuaded him to close up his shop and accelerate its production. this        
involved several additional hours‘ curse-worthy delay. i had been too             
keyed-up to sleep then and was unable to do so now, as i was edging my            
way through shadows.                                                              
i forced back the fatigue and the evening and found some clouds to                
shade me. we moved along a dry, deeply rutted, clay road. it was an ugly          
shade of yellow, and it cracked and crumbled as we went. brown grasses            
hung limply on either side of the way, and the trees were short, twisted          
things, their barks thick and shaggy. we passed numerous outcrops of shale.       
i had paid doyle well for his compounds, and had also purchased a                 
handsome bracelet to be delivered to dara the following day. my diamonds          
were at my belt, grayswandir near to my hand. star and firedrake walked           
steadily, strongly. i was on my way to having it made.                            
i wondered whether benedict had returned home yet. i wondered how                 
long he would remain deceived as to my whereabouts. i was by no means             
out of danger from him. he could follow a trail for a great distance through      
shadow, and i was leaving him a good one. i had little choice in the matter,      
though. i needed the wagon, i was stuck with our present speed, and i was         
in no condition to manage another hellride. i handled the shifts slowly and       
carefully, very conscious of my dulled senses and growing weariness,              
counting on the gradual accumulation of change and distance to build up a         
barrier between benedict and myself, hoping that it would soon become an          
impenetrable one.                                                                 
i found my way from late afternoon back to noontide within the next               
two miles, but kept it a cloudy noon, for it was only its light that i desired,   
not its heat. then i managed to locate a small breeze. it increased the           
probability of rain, but it was worth it. you can’t have everything.              
i was fighting back drowsiness by then, and the temptation was great to           
awaken ganelon and simply add more miles to our distance by letting him           
drive while i slept. but i was afraid to try it this early in the journey. there  
were still too many things to do.                                                 
i wanted more daylight, but i also wanted a better road, and i was sick           
of that goddamned yellow clay, and i had to do something about those              
clouds, and i had to keep in mind where we were headed…                           
i rubbed my eyes, i took several deep breaths. things were starting to            
jump around inside my head, and the steady clop-clop of the horses‘ hoofs         
and the creaking of the wagon were starting to have a soporific effect. i was     
already numb to the jolting and the swaying. the reins hung loosely in my         
hands, and i had already nodded and let them slip once. fortunately, the          
horses seemed to have a good idea as to what was expected of them.                
after a time, we mounted a long, easy slope that led down into mid-               
morning. by then, the sky was quite dark, and it took several miles and half      
a dozen twistings of the road to dissipate the cloud cover somewhat. a            
storm could turn our way into a river of mud quite quickly. i winced at the       
thought, let the sky alone and concentrated on the road once more.                
we came to a dilapidated bridge leading across a dry stream bed. on its           
other side, the road was smoother, less yellow. as we proceeded, it grew          
darker, flatter, harder, and the grass came green beside it. by then, though, it  
had begun raining.                                                                
i fought with this for a time, determined not to surrender my grass and           
the dark, easy road. my head ached, but the shower ended within a quarter         
of a mile and the sun came out once more. the sun… oh yes, the sun.               
we rattled on, finally coming to a dip in the road that kept twisting its         
way down among brighter trees. we descended into a cool valley, where we          
eventually crossed another small bridge, this one with a narrow band of           
water drifting along the middle of the bed beneath it. i had wrapped the          
reins about my wrist by then, because i kept nodding. as from a great             
distance, i focused my concentration, straightening, sorting…                     
birds queried the day, tentatively, from within the woods to my right.            
glistening droplets of dew clung to the grass, the leaves. a chill came into      
the air, and the rays of the morning sun slanted down through the trees…          
but my body was not fooled by the awakening within this shadow, and i             
was relieved finally to hear ganelon stir and curse. if he had not come           
around before much longer i would have had to awaken him.                         
good enough. i tugged gently on the reins and the horses got the idea             
and halted. i put on the brake, as we were still on an incline, and located a     
water bottle.                                                                     
“here!” said ganelon, as i drank. “leave a drop for me!” i passed the             
bottle back to him.                                                               
“you are taking over now,” i told him. “i have to get some sleep.”                
he drank for half a minute, then let out an explosive exhalation.                 
“right,” he said, swinging himself over the edge of the wagon and                 
down. “but bide a moment. nature summons.”                                        
he stepped off the road, and i crawled back onto the bed of the wagon             
and stretched out where he had lain, folding my cloak into a pillow.              
moments later, i heard him climb onto the driver’s seat, and there was a          
jolt as he released the brake. i heard him cluck his tongue and snap the reins    
lightly.                                                                          
“is it morning?” he called back to me.                                            
“yes.”                                                                            
“god! i’ve slept all day and all night!”                                          
i chuckled.                                                                       
“no. i did a little shadow-shifting,” i said. “you only slept six or seven        
hours.”                                                                           
“i don’t understand. but never mind, i believe you. where are we                  
now?”                                                                             
“still heading northeast,” i said, “around twenty miles out of the city           
and maybe a dozen or so from benedict’s place. we have moved through              
shadow, also.”                                                                    
“what am i to do now?”                                                            
“just keep following the road. we need the distance.”                             
“could benedict still reach us?”                                                  
“i think so. that’s why we can’t give the horses their rest yet.”                 
“all right. is there anything special i should be alert for?”                     
“no.”                                                                             
“when should i raise you?”                                                        
“never.”                                                                          
he was silent then, and as i waited for my consciousness to be                    
consumed, i thought of dara, of course. i had been thinking of her on and         
off all day.                                                                      
the thing had been quite unpremeditated on my part. i had not even thought        
of her as a woman until she came into my arms and revised my thinking on          
the subject. a moment later, and my spinal nerves took over, reducing much        
of what passes for cerebration down to its basics, as freud had once said to      
me. i could not blame it on the alcohol, as i had not had that much and it        
had not affected me especially. why did i want to blame it on anything?           
because i felt somewhat guilty, that was why. she was too distant a relation      
for me to really think of her as one. that was not it. i did not feel i had       
taken unfair advantage of her, for she had known what she was doing when          
she came looking for me.                                                          
it was the circumstances that made me question my own motives, even               
in the midst of things. i had wanted to do more than simply win her               
confidence and a measure of friendship when i had first spoken with her           
and taken her on that walk into shadow. i was trying to alienate some of her      
loyalty, trust, and affection from benedict and transfer it to myself. i had      
wanted her on my side, as a possible ally in what might become an enemy           
camp. i had hoped to be able to use her, should the need arise when the           
going got rough. all this was true. but i did not want to believe that i had      
had her as i did just to further this end. i suspected there was some truth to    
it, though, and it made me feel uncomfortable and more than a little              
ignoble. why? i had done plenty of things in my time that many would              
consider much worse, and i was not especially troubled by these.                  
i wrestled with it, not liking to admit it but already knowing the answer.        
i cared for the girl. it was as simple as that. it was different from the         
friendship i had felt for lorraine, with its element of world-weary               
understanding between two veterans about it, or the air of casual sensuality      
that had existed briefly between moire and myself back before i had taken         
the pattern for the second time. it was quite different. i had known her so       
briefly that it was most illogical. i was a man with centuries behind me.         
yet… i had not felt this way in centuries. i had forgotten the feeling, until     
now. i did not want to be in love with her. not now. later, perhaps. better       
yet, not at all. she was all wrong for me. she was a child. everything that       
she would want to do, everything that she would find new and fascinating, i       
had already done. no, it was all wrong. i had no business falling in love         
with her. i should not let myself…                                                
ganelon hummed some bawdy tune, badly. the wagon jounced and                      
creaked, took a turn uphill. the sun fell upon my face, and i covered my          
eyes with my forearm. somewhere thereabout, oblivion fixed its grip and           
squeezed.                                                                         
when i awoke, it was past noon and i was feeling grimy. i took a long drink       
of water, poured some in the palm of my hand, and rubbed it in my eyes. i         
combed my hair with my fingers. i took a look at our surroundings.                
there was greenery about us, small stands of trees and open spaces                
where tall grasses grew. it was still a dirt road that we traveled, hard-packed   
and fairly smooth. the sky was clear, but for a few small clouds, and shade       
alternated with sunlight fairly regularly. there was a light breeze.              
“back among the living. good!” said ganelon, as i climbed over the                
front wall and took a seat beside him.                                            
“the horses are getting tired, corwin, and i’d like to stretch my legs a          
bit,” he said. “i’m also getting very hungry. aren’t you?”                        
“yes. pull off into that shady place to the left and we’ll stop awhile.”          
“i would like to go on a bit farther than that,” he said.                         
“for any special reason?”                                                         
“yes. i want to show you something.”                                              
“go ahead.”                                                                       
we clopped along for perhaps a half a mile, then came to a bend in the            
road that took us in a more northerly direction. before very long we came to      
a hill, and when we had mounted it there was another hill, leading even           
higher.                                                                           
“how much farther do you want to go?” i said.                                     
“let’s take this next hill,” he replied. “we might be able to see it from         
up there.”                                                                        
“all right.”                                                                      
the horses strained against the steepness of that second hill, and i got          
out and pushed from behind. when we finally reached the top, i felt even          
grimier from the mixture of sweat and dust, but i was fully awake once            
more. ganelon reined in the horses and put on the brake. he climbed back          
in the wagon and up onto a crate then. he stood, facing to the left, and          
shaded his eyes.                                                                  
“come up here, corwin,” he called.                                                
i climbed over the tailgate and he squatted and extended a hand. i took           
it, and he helped me up onto the crate, where i stood beside him. he              
pointed, and i followed the gesture.                                              
perhaps three-quarters of a mile distant, running from left to right for as       
far as i could see, was a wide, black band. we were several hundred yards         
higher than the thing and had a decent view of, i would say, half a mile of       
its length. it was several hundred feet across, and though it curved and          
turned twice that i could see, its width appeared to remain constant. there       
were trees within it, and they were totally black. there seemed to be some        
movement. i could not say what it was. perhaps it was only the wind               
rippling the black grasses near its edge. but there was also a definite           
sensation of flowing within it, like currents in a flat, dark river.              
“what is it?” i said.                                                             
“i thought perhaps you could tell me,” ganelon replied. “i had thought            
it a part of your shadow-sorceries.”                                              
i shook my head slowly.                                                           
“i was quite drowsy, but i would remember if i had arranged for                   
anything that strange to occur. how did you know it was there?”                   
“we skirted it several times as you slept, then edged away again. i did           
not like the feeling at all. it was a very familiar one. does it not remind you   
of something?”                                                                    
“yes. yes, it does. unfortunately.”                                               
he nodded.                                                                        
“it’s like that damned circle back in lorraine. that’s what it’s like.”           
“the black road…” i said.                                                         
“what?”                                                                           
“the black road,” i repeated. “i did not know what she was referring to           
when she mentioned it, but now i begin to understand. this is not good at         
all.”                                                                             
“another ill omen?”                                                               
“i am afraid so.”                                                                 
he cursed, then, “will it cause us any immediate trouble?” he asked.              
“i don’t believe so, but i am not certain.”                                       
he climbed down from the crate and i followed.                                    
“let’s find some forage for the horses then,” he said, “and tend to our           
own bellies as well.”                                                             
“yes.”                                                                            
we moved forward and he took the reins. we found a good spot at the               
foot of the hill.                                                                 
we tarried there for the better part of an hour, talking mainly of avalon.        
we did not speak again of the black road, though i thought of it quite a bit. i   
had to get a closer look at the thing, of course.                                 
when we were ready to move on, i took the reins again. the horses,                
somewhat refreshed, moved out at a good pace.                                     
ganelon sat beside me on the left, still in a talkative mood. i was only          
just then beginning to realize how much this strange homecoming had               
meant to him. he had revisited many of his old haunts from the days of his        
outlawry, as well as four battlefields where he had distinguished himself         
greatly after he had achieved respectability. i was in many ways moved by         
his reminiscences. an unusual mixture of gold and clay, this man. he              
should have been an amberite.                                                     
the miles slid by quickly and we were drawing near to the black road              
again when i felt a familiar mental jab. i passed the reins to ganelon.           
“take them!” i said. “drive!”                                                     
“what is it?”                                                                     
“later! just drive!”                                                              
“should i hurry?”                                                                 
“no. keep it normal. don’t say anything for a while.”                             
i closed my eyes and rested my head in my hands, emptying my mind                 
and building a wall around the emptiness. no one home. out to lunch. no           
solicitors. this property is vacant. do not disturb. trespassers will be          
prosecuted. beware of dog. falling rock. slippery when wet. to be razed           
for urban renewal…                                                                
it eased, then came on again, hard, and i blocked it again. there                 
followed a third wave. i stopped that one, too.                                   
then it was gone.                                                                 
i sighed, massaged my eyeballs.                                                   
“it’s all right now,” i said.                                                     
“what happened?”                                                                  
“someone tried to reach me by a very special means. it was almost                 
certainly benedict. he must just now have found out any of a number of            
things that could make him want to stop us. i’ll take the reins again now. i      
fear he will be on our trail soon.”                                               
ganelon handed them over.                                                         
“what are our chances of escaping him?”                                           
“pretty fair now. i’d say, that we’ve got more distance behind us. i am           
going to shuffle some more shadows as soon as my head stops spinning.”            
i guided us on, and our way twisted and wound, paralleling that black             
road for a time, then heading in closer to it. finally, we were only a few        
hundred yards away from it.                                                       
ganelon studied it in silence for a long while, then said, “it reminds me         
too much of that other place. the little tongues of mist that lick about          
things, the feeling that something is always moving just at the corner of         
your eye…”                                                                        
i bit my lip. i began to perspire heavily. i was trying to shift away from        
the thing now and there was some sort of resistance. it was not the same          
feeling of monolithic immovability as occurs when you try to move through         
shadow in amber. it was altogether different. it was a feeling of                 
inescapability.                                                                   
we moved through shadow all right. the sun drifted higher in the                  
heavens, heading back toward noonday—for i did not relish the thought of          
nightfall beside that black strip—and the sky lost something of its blue and      
the trees shot higher about us and mountains appeared in the distance.            
was it that the road cut through shadow itself?                                   
it must. why else would julian and gerard have located it and been                
sufficiently intrigued to explore the thing?                                      
it was unfortunate, but i feared we had much in common, that road and             
i. damn it!                                                                       
we moved beside it for a long while, gradually moving closer together,            
also. soon, only about a hundred feet separated us. fifty…                        
… and, as i had felt they eventually must, our paths finally intersected.         
i drew rein. i packed my pipe and lit it, smoked as i studied the thing.          
star and firedrake obviously did not approve of the black area that cut           
across our way. they had whinnied and tried to pull off to the side.              
it was a long, diagonal cut across the black place if we wanted to keep           
to the road. also, part of the terrain was hidden from our sight by a series of   
low, stone hills. there were heavy grasses at the edge of the black and           
patches of it, here and there, about the foot of the hills. bits of mist scudded  
among them and faint, vaporous clouds hovered in all the hollows. the sky,        
seen through the atmosphere that hung about the place, was several shades         
darker, with a smeared, sooty tone to it. a silence that was not the same as      
stillness lay upon it, almost as though some unseen entity were poised,           
holding its breath.                                                               
then we heard a scream. it was a girl’s voice. the old lady in distress           
trick?                                                                            
it came from somewhere to the right, beyond those hills. it smelled               
fishy. but hell! it could be real.                                                
i tossed the reins to ganelon and jumped to the ground, taking                    
grayswandir into my hand.                                                         
“i’m going to investigate,” i said, moving off to the right and leaping           
the gulley that ran beside the road.                                              
“hurry back.”                                                                     
i plowed through some brush and scrambled up a rocky slope. i pushed              
my way through more shrubbery on its down side and mounted another,               
higher slope. the scream came again as i was climbing it, and this time i         
heard other sounds as well.                                                       
then i reached the top and was able to see for a good distance.                   
the black area began about forty feet below me, and the scene i sought            
was laid about a hundred-fifty feet within it.                                    
it was a monochromatic sight, save for the flames. a woman, all in                
white, black hair hanging loose, down to her waist, was bound to one of           
those dark trees, smoldering branches heaped around her feet. half a dozen        
hairy, albino men, almost completely naked and continuing the process of          
undressing as they moved, shuffled about, muttering and chuckling, poking         
at the woman and the fire with sticks that they carried and clutching at their    
loins repeatedly. the flames were high enough now to singe the woman’s            
garments, causing them to smolder. her long dress was sufficiently torn and       
disarrayed so that i could see she possessed a lovely, voluptuous form,           
though the smoke wrapped her in such a manner that i was unable to see her        
face.                                                                             
i rushed forward, entering the area of the black road, leaping over the           
long, twining grasses, and charged into the group, beheading the nearest          
man and running another through before they knew i was upon them. the             
others turned and flailed at me with their sticks, shouting as they swung         
them.                                                                             
grayswandir ate off big chunks of them, until they fell apart and were            
silent. their juices were black.                                                  
i turned, holding my breath, and kicked away the front of the fire. then          
i moved in close to the lady and cut her bonds. she fell into my arms,            
sobbing.                                                                          
it was only then that i noticed her face—or, rather, her lack of one. she         
wore a full, ivory mask, oval and curving, featureless, save for two tiny         
rectangular grilles for her eyes.                                                 
i drew her away from the smoke and the gore. she clung to me,                     
breathing heavily, thrusting her entire body against me. after what seemed        
an appropriate period of time, i attempted to disentangle myself. but she         
would not release me, and she was surprisingly strong.                            
“it is all right now,” i said, or something equally trite and apt, but she        
did not reply.                                                                    
she kept shifting her grip upon my body, with rough caressing                     
movements and a rather disconcerting effect. her desirability was                 
enhanced, from instant to instant. i found myself stroking her hair, and the      
rest of her as well.                                                              
“it is all right now,” i repeated. “who are you? why were they burning            
you? who were they?”                                                              
but she did not reply. she had stopped sobbing, but her breathing was             
still heavy, although in a different way.                                         
“why do you wear this mask?”                                                      
i reached for it and she jerked her head back.                                    
this did not seem especially important, though. while some cold,                  
logical part of me knew that the passion was irrational, i was as powerless       
as the gods of the epicureans. i wanted her and i was ready to have her.          
then i heard ganelon cry out my name and i tried to turn in that                  
direction.                                                                        
but she restrained me. i was amazed at her strength.                              
“child of amber,” came her half-familiar voice. “we owe you this for              
what you have given us, and we will have all of you now.”                         
ganelon’s voice came to me again, a steady stream of profanities.                 
i exerted all my strength against that grip and it weakened. my hand              
shot forward and i tore away the mask.                                            
there came a brief cry of anger as i freed myself, and four final, fading         
words as the mask came away:                                                      
“amber must be destroyed!”                                                        
there was no face behind the mask. there was nothing there at all.                
her garment collapsed and hung limply over my arm. she—or it—had                  
vanished.                                                                         
turning quickly, i saw that ganelon was sprawled at the edge of the               
black, his legs twisted unnaturally. his blade rose and fell slowly, but i        
could not see at what he was striking. i ran toward him.                          
the black grasses, over which i had leaped, were twined about his                 
ankles and legs. even as he hacked at them, others lashed about as though         
seeking to capture his sword arm. he had succeeded in partly freeing his          
right leg, and i leaned far forward and managed to finish the job.                
i moved to a position behind him, out of reach of the grasses, and tossed         
away the mask, which i just then realized i was still clutching. it fell to       
earth beyond the edge of the black and immediately began to smolder.              
catching him under the arms, i strove to drag ganelon back. the stuff             
resisted fiercely, but at last i tore him free. i carried him then, leaping over  
the remaining dark grasses that separated us from the more docile, green          
variety beyond the road.                                                          
he regained his footing and continued to lean heavily against me,                 
bending forward and slapping at his leggings.                                     
“they’re numb,” he said. “my legs are asleep.” i helped him back to the           
wagon. he transferred his grip to its side and began stamping his feet.           
“they’re tingling,” he announced. “it’s starting to come back… oow!”              
finally, he limped to the front of the wagon. i helped him climb onto the         
seat and followed him up. he sighed.                                              
“that’s better,” he said. “they’re coming along now. that stuff just              
sucked the strength out of them. out of the rest of me, too. what                 
happened?”                                                                        
“our bad omen made good on its promise.”                                          
“what now?” i picked up the reins and released the brake.                         
“we go across,” i said. “i have to find out more about this thing. keep           
your blade handy.”                                                                
he granted and laid the weapon across his knees. the horses did not               
like the idea of going on, but i flicked their flanks lightly with the whip and   
they began to move.                                                               
we entered the black area, and it was like riding into a world war ii             
newsreel. remote though near at hand, stark, depressing, grim. even the           
creaking and the hoof falls were somehow muffled, made to seem more               
distant. a faint, persistent ringing began in my ears. the grasses beside the     
road stirred as we passed, though i kept well away from them. we passed           
through several patches of mist. they were odorless, but our breathing grew       
labored on each occasion. as we neared the first hill, i began the shift that     
would take us through shadow.                                                     
we rounded the hill.                                                              
nothing.                                                                          
the dark, miasmal prospect was unaltered.                                         
i grew angry then. i drew the pattern from memory and held it blazing             
before my mind’s eye. i essayed the shift once more.                              
immediately, my head began to ache. a pain shot from my forehead to               
the back of my skull and hung there like a hot wire. but this only fanned my      
anger and caused me to try even harder to shift the black road into               
nothingness.                                                                      
things wavered. the mists thickened, rolled across the road in billows.           
outlines grew indistinct. i shook the reins. the horses moved faster. my          
head began to throb, felt as if it were about to come apart. instead,             
momentarily, everything else did…                                                 
the ground shook, cracking in places, but it was more than just that.             
everything seemed to undergo a spasmodic shudder, and the cracking was            
more than mere fracture lines in the ground.                                      
it was as though someone had suddenly kicked the leg of a table on                
which a loosely assembled jigsaw puzzle lay. gaps appeared in the entire          
prospect: here, a green bough; there, a sparkle of water, a glimpse of blue       
sky, absolute blackness, white nothingness, the front of a brick building,        
faces behind a window, fire, a piece of star-filled sky…                          
the horses were galloping by then, and i had all i could do to keep from          
screaming for the pain.                                                           
a babble of mixed noises—animal, human, mechanical—washed over                    
us. it seemed that i could hear ganelon cursing, but i could not be certain.      
i thought that i would pass out from the pain, but i determined, out of           
sheer stubbornness and anger, to persist until i did. i concentrated on the       
pattern as a dying man might cry out to his god, and i threw my entire will       
against the existence of the black road.                                          
then the pressure was off and the horses were plunging wildly,                    
dragging us into a green field. ganelon snatched at the reins, but i drew on      
them myself and shouted to the horses until they halted. we had crossed the       
black road.                                                                       
i turned immediately and looked back. the scene had the wavering                  
quality of something seen through troubled waters. our path through it            
stood clean and steady, however, like a bridge or a dam, and the grasses at       
its edge were green.                                                              
“that was worse,” ganelon said, “than the ride you took me on when                
you exiled me.”                                                                   
“i think so, too,” i said, and i spoke to the horses, gently, finally             
persuading them to return to the dirt road and continue on along it.              
the world was brighter here, and the trees that we soon moved among               
were great pines. the air was fresh with their fragrance. squirrels and birds     
moved within them. the soil was darker, richer. we seemed to be at a              
higher altitude than we had been before the crossing. it pleased me that we       
had indeed shifted—and in the direction i had desired.                            
our way curved, ran back a bit, straightened. every now and then we               
caught a glimpse of the black road. it was not too far off to our right. we       
were still running roughly parallel to it. the thing definitely cut through       
shadow. from what we saw of it, it appeared to have settled back down to          
being its normal, sinister self once more.                                        
my headache faded and my heart grew somewhat lighter. we achieved                 
higher ground and a pleasant view over a large area of hills and forest,          
reminding me of parts of pennsylvania i had enjoyed driving through years         
earlier.                                                                          
i stretched; then, “how are your legs now?” i asked.                              
“all right,” ganelon said, looking back along our trail. “i can see for a         
great distance, corwin…”                                                          
“yes?”                                                                            
“i see a horseman, coming very fast.”                                             
i stood and turned. i think i might have groaned as i dropped back into           
the seat and shook the reins.                                                     
he was still too far off to tell for certain—on the other side of the black       
road. but who else could it be, pushing along at that speed on our trail? i       
cursed then.                                                                      
we were nearing the crest of the rise. i turned to ganelon and said, “get         
ready for another hellride.”                                                      
“it’s benedict?”                                                                  
“i think so. we lost too much time back there. he can move awfully fast           
—especially through shadow—all alone like that.”                                  
“do you think you can still lose him?”                                            
“we’ll find out,” i said. “real soon now.”                                        
i clucked to the horses and shook the reins again. we reached the top             
and a blast of icy air struck us. we leveled off and the shadow of a boulder      
to our left darkened the sky. when we had passed it, the darkness remained        
and crystals of fine-textured snow stung our faces and hands.                     
within a few moments, we were heading downward once more and the                  
snowfall became a blinding blizzard. the wind screamed in our ears and the        
wagon rattled and skidded. i leveled us quickly. there were drifts all about      
by then and the road was white. our breath fumed and ice glistened on trees       
and rocks.                                                                        
motion and temporary bafflement of the senses. that was what it                   
took…                                                                             
we raced on, and the wind slammed and bit and cried out. drifts began             
to cover the road.                                                                
we rounded a bend and emerged from the storm. the world was still a               
glazed-over thing and an occasional flake flitted by, but the sun pulled free     
of the clouds, pouring light upon the land, and we headed downward once           
more…                                                                             
… passing through a fog and emerging in a barren, though snowless                 
waste of rock and pitted land…                                                    
… we bore to the right, regained the sun, followed a twisted course on a          
level plain, winding among tall, featureless stands of blue-gray stone…           
… where far off to our right the black road paced as.                             
waves of heat washed over us and the land steamed. bubbles popped in              
boiling stews that filled the craters, adding their fumes to the dank air.        
shallow puddles lay like a handful of old, bronze coins.                          
the horses raced, half-maddened now, as geysers began to erupt along              
the trail. scalding waters spewed across the roadway, narrowly missing us,        
running in steaming, slick sheets. the sky was brass and the sun was a            
mushy apple. the wind was a panting dog with bad breath.                          
the ground trembled, and far off to our left a mountain blew its top              
toward the heavens and buried fires after it. an ear-splitting crash              
temporarily deafened us and concussion waves kept beating against our             
bodies. the wagon swayed and shimmied.                                            
the ground continued to shake and the winds slammed us with near-                 
hurricane force as we rushed toward a row of black-topped hills. we left          
what there was of a roadway when it turned in the wrong direction and             
headed, bumping and shuddering, across the plain itself. the hills continued      
to grow, dancing in the troubled air.                                             
i turned when i felt ganelon’s hand on my arm. he was shouting                    
something, but i could not hear him. then he pointed back and i followed          
his gesture. i saw nothing that i had not expected to see. the air was            
turbulent, filled with dust, debris, ashes. i shrugged and returned my            
attention to the hills.                                                           
a greater darkness occurred at the base of the nearest hill. i made for it.       
it grew before me as the ground slanted downward once more, an                    
enormous cavern mouth, curtained by a steady fall of dust and gravel.             
i cracked the whip in the air and we raced across the final five or six           
hundred yards and plunged into it.                                                
i began slowing the horses immediately, letting them relax into a walk.           
we continued to move downward, turned a corner, and came into a                   
wide, high grotto. light leaked down from holes high above, dappling              
stalactites and falling upon quivering green pools. the ground continued to       
shake, and my hearing took a turn for the better as i saw a massive               
stalagmite crumble and heard the faint tinkle of its fall.                        
we crossed a black-bottomed chasm on a bridge that might have been                
limestone, which shattered behind us and vanished.                                
bits of rock rained down from overhead and sometimes large stones                 
fell. patches of green and red fungus glowed in corners and cracks, streaks       
of minerals sparkled and bent, large crystals and flat flowers of pale stone      
added to the moist, eerie beauty of the place. we wheeled through caverns         
like chains of bubbles and coursed a white-chested torrent until it vanished      
into a black hole.                                                                
a long, corkscrew gallery took us upward once more, and i heard                   
ganelon’s voice, faint and echoing, “i thought that i glimpsed movement—          
that might be a rider—at the crest of the mountain—just for an instant-back       
there.” we moved into a slightly brighter chamber.                                
“if it was benedict, he’s got a hard act to follow,” i shouted, and there         
came the tremors and muffled crashings as more things collapsed behind us.        
we proceeded onward and upward, until finally openings began to                   
occur overhead, giving upon patches of clear blue sky. the hoof clicks and        
the sounds of the wagon gradually assumed a normal volume and their               
echoes came to us also. the tremors ceased, small birds darted above us,          
and the light increased in intensity.                                             
then another twisting of the way, and our exit lay before us, a wide, low         
opening onto day. we had to duck our heads as we passed beneath the               
jagged lintel. we bounced up and over a jutting lip of moss-covered stone,        
then looked upon a bed of gravel that lay like a scythed track upon the           
hillside, passing among gigantic trees, vanishing within them, below. i           
made a clicking noise with my tongue, encouraging the horses on their way.        
“they are very tired now,” ganelon remarked.                                      
“i know. soon they will get to rest, one way or another.”                         
the gravel crunched beneath our wheels. the smell of the trees was                
good.                                                                             
“have you noticed it? down there, off to the right?”                              
“what…?” i began, turning my head. then, “oh,” i finished.                        
the infernal black road was with us still, perhaps a mile distant.                
“how many shadows does it cut across?” i mused.                                   
“all of them, it would seem,” ganelon suggested.                                  
i shook my head slowly. “i hope not,” i said.                                     
we proceeded downward, beneath a blue sky and a golden sun                        
westering in a normal way.                                                        
“i was almost afraid to come out of that cave,” ganelon said after a              
time. “no telling what would be on this side.”                                    
“the horses couldn’t take much more. i had to let up. if that was                 
benedict we saw, his horse had better be in very good condition. he was           
pushing it hard. then to have it face all that… i think he would fall back.”      
“maybe it’s used to it,” ganelon said, as we crunched around a bend to            
the right, losing sight of the cave mouth.                                        
“there is always that possibility,” i said, and i thought of dara again,          
wondering what she was doing at that moment.                                      
we wove our way steadily downward, shifting slowly and                            
imperceptibly. our trail kept drifting to the right, and i cursed when i          
realized we were nearing the black road.                                          
“damn! it’s as persistent as an insurance salesman!” i said, feeling my           
anger turn to something like hatred. “when the time is right, i am going to       
destroy that thing!”                                                              
ganelon did not reply. he was taking a long drink of water. he passed             
me the bottle and i did, too.                                                     
at length, we achieved level terrain, and the trail continued to twist and        
curve at the least excuse. it allowed the horses to take it easy and it would     
slow a mounted pursuer.                                                           
about an hour later, i began to feel comfortable and we stopped to eat.           
we had just about finished our meal when ganelon—who had not removed              
his gaze from the hillside—stood and shaded his eyes.                             
“no,” i said, leaping to my feet. “i don’t believe it.”                           
a lone rider had emerged from the mouth of the cave. i watched as he              
halted for a moment, then continued on down the trail.                            
“what do we do now?” ganelon asked.                                               
“let’s pick up our stuff and get moving again. we can at least delay the          
inevitable a little longer. i want more time to think.”                           
we rolled once more, still moving at a moderate pace, though my mind              
was racing at full speed. there had to be a way to stop him. preferably,          
without killing him.                                                              
but i couldn’t think of any.                                                      
except for the black road, which was edging nearer once more, we had              
come into a lovely afternoon in a beautiful place. it was a shame to dampen       
it with blood, particularly if it might be my blood. even with his blade in       
his left hand, i was afraid to face him. ganelon would be of no use to me.        
benedict would barely notice him.                                                 
i shifted as we took another turning. moments later, a faint smell of             
smoke came to my nostrils. i shifted slightly again.                              
“he’s coming fast!” ganelon announced. “i just saw—there’s smoke!                 
flames! the woods are on fire!”                                                   
i laughed and looked back. half the hillside swam under smoke and an              
orange thing raced through the green, its crackling just then reaching my         
ears. of their own accord, the horses increased their pace.                       
“corwin! did you—?”                                                               
“yes! if it were steeper and there were no trees, i’d have tried an               
avalanche.”                                                                       
the air was momentarily filled with birds. we drew nearer the black               
way. firedrake tossed his head and whinnied. there were flecks of foam on         
his muzzle. he tried to bolt, then reared and pawed the air. star made a          
frightened noise and pulled to the right. i fought a moment, regained             
control, decided to let them run a bit.                                           
“he’s still coming!” cried ganelon.                                               
i cursed and we ran. eventually, our path brought us alongside the black          
road. we were on a long straightaway, and a glance back showed me that            
the whole hillside was ablaze, the trail running like a nasty scar down its       
middle. it was then that i saw the rider. he was almost halfway down and          
moving like something in the kentucky derby. god! what a horse that had           
to be! i wondered what shadow had borne him.                                      
i drew on the reins, gently at first, then harder, until finally we began to      
slow. we were only a few hundred feet from the black road by then, and i          
had seen to it that there was a place not too far ahead where the gap             
narrowed to thirty or forty. i managed to rein in the horses when we reached      
it, and they stood there quivering. i handed the reins to ganelon, drew           
grayswandir, and stepped down to the road.                                        
why not? it was a good, clear, level area, and perhaps that black,                
blasted slice of land, contrasting with the colors of life and growth             
immediately beside it, appealed to some morbid instinct in me.                    
“what now?” ganelon asked.                                                        
“we cannot shake him,” i said, “and if he makes it through the fire he            
will be here in a few minutes. there is no sense to running any farther. i’ll     
meet him here.”                                                                   
ganelon twisted the reins around a side bar and reached for his blade.            
“no,” i said. “you cannot affect the outcome one way or the other. here           
is what i want you to do: take the wagon on up the road and wait there with       
it. if things are resolved to my satisfaction, we will be continuing on. if they  
are not, surrender immediately to benedict. it is me that he wants, and he        
will be the only one left who can take you back to avalon. he will do it,         
too. you will at least retire to your homeland that way.”                         
he hesitated.                                                                     
“go on,” i told him. “do as i said.”                                              
he looked down at the ground. he unwound the reins. he looked at me.              
“good luck,” he said, and he shook the horses forward.                            
i backed off the trail, moved to a position before a small stand of               
saplings, and waited. i kept grayswandir in my hand, glanced once at the          
black road, then fixed my eyes on the trail.                                      
before long, he appeared up near the flame line, smoke and fire all               
about him, burning branches falling. it was benedict all right, his face          
partly muffled, the stump of his right arm upraised to shield his eyes,           
coming like some ghastly escapee from hell. bursting through a shower of          
sparks and cinders, he came into the clear and plunged on down the trail.         
soon, i could hear the hoofbeats. a gentlemanly thing to do would be to           
sheathe my blade while i waited. if i did that, though, i might not have a        
chance to draw it again.                                                          
i found myself wondering how benedict would be wearing his blade                  
and what sort it would be. straight? curved? long? short? he could use            
them all with equal facility. he had taught me how to fence…                      
it might be smart as well as gentlemanly to sheathe grayswandir. he               
might be willing to talk first—and this way i was asking for trouble. as the      
hoofbeats grew louder, though, i realized i was afraid to put it away.            
i wiped my palm only once before he came into view. he had slowed                 
for the turn, and he must have seen me at the same instant i saw him. he          
rode straight toward me, slowing. but halting did not appear to be his            
immediate aim.                                                                    
it was almost a mystical experience. i do not know how else to put it.            
my mind outran time as he neared, and it was as though i had an eternity to       
ponder the approach of this man who was my brother. his garments were             
filthy, his face blackened, the stump of his right arm raised, gesturing          
anywhere. the great beast that he rode was striped, black and red, with a         
wild red mane and tail. but it really was a horse, and its eyes rolled and        
there was foam at its mouth and its breathing was painful to hear. i saw then     
that he wore his blade slung across his back, for its haft protruded high         
above his right shoulder. still slowing, eyes fixed upon me, he departed the      
road, bearing slightly toward my left, jerked the reins once and released         
them, keeping control of the horse with his knees. his left hand went up in a     
salute-like movement that passed above his head and seized the hilt of his        
weapon. it came free without a sound, describing a beautiful arc above him        
and coming to rest in a lethal position out from his left shoulder and            
slanting back, like a single wing of dull steel with a minuscule line of edge     
that gleamed like a filament of mirror. the picture he presented was burned       
into my mind with a kind of magnificence, a certain splendor that was             
strangely moving. the blade was a long, scythe like affair that i had seen        
him use before. only then we had stood as allies against a mutual foe i had       
begun to believe unbeatable. benedict had proved otherwise that night.            
now that i saw it raised against me i was overwhelmed with a sense of my          
own mortality, which i had never experienced before in this fashion. it was       
as though a layer had been stripped from the world and i had a sudden, full       
understanding of death itself.                                                    
the moment was gone. i backed into the grove. i had stood there so that           
i could take advantage of the trees. i dropped back about twelve feet among       
them and took two steps to my left. the horse reared at the last possible         
moment and snorted and whinnied, moist nostrils flaring. it turned aside,         
tearing up turf. benedict’s arm moved with near-invisible speed, like the         
tongue of a toad, and his blade passed through a sapling i’d guess at three       
inches in diameter. the tree continued to stand upright for a moment, then        
slowly toppled.                                                                   
his boots struck the earth and he strode toward me. i had wanted the              
grove for this reason, also, to make him come to me in a place where a long       
blade would be hampered by branches and boles.                                    
but as he advanced, he swung the weapon, almost casually, back and                
forth, and the trees fell about him as he passed. if only he were not so          
infernally competent. if only he were not benedict…                               
“benedict,” i said, in a normal voice, “she is an adult now, and she is           
capable of making up her own mind about things.”                                  
but he gave no sign of having heard me. he just kept coming, swinging             
that great blade from side to side. it made an almost ringing sound as it         
passed through the air, followed by a soft thukk! as it bit through another       
tree, slowing only slightly. i raised grayswandir to point at his breast.         
“come no farther, benedict,” i said. “i do not wish to fight with you.”           
he moved his blade into an attack position and said one word:                     
“murderer!”                                                                       
his hand twitched then and my blade was almost simultaneously beaten              
aside. i parried the ensuing thrust and he brushed my riposte aside and was       
at me again.                                                                      
this time i did not even bother to riposte. i simply parried, retreated,          
and stepped behind a tree.                                                        
“i don’t understand,” i said, beating down his blade as it slid by the            
trunk and nearly skewered me. “i have not murdered anyone recently.               
certainly not in avalon.”                                                         
another thukk! and the tree was falling toward me. i got out of its way           
and retreated, parrying.                                                          
“murderer,” he said again.                                                        
“i don’t know what you are talking about, benedict.”                              
“liar!”                                                                           
i stood my ground then and held it. damn it! it was senseless to die for          
the wrong reason! i riposted as fast as i could, seeking openings                 
everywhere. there were none.                                                      
“at least tell me!” i shouted. “please!”                                          
but he seemed to be finished with talking. he pressed forward and i had           
to fall back once more. it was like trying to fence with a glacier. i became      
convinced then that he was out of his mind, not that that helped me any.          
with anybody else, an insane madness would cause the loss of some control         
in a fight. but benedict had hammered out his reflexes over the centuries,        
and i seriously believed that the removal of his cerebral cortex would not        
have altered his movements from their state of perfection.                        
he drove me steadily back, and i dodged among trees and he cut them               
down and kept coming. i made the mistake of attacking and barely stopped          
his counterthrusts inches from my breast. i fought down the first wave of         
panic that came to me when i saw that he was driving me back toward the           
edge of the grove. soon he would have me in the open, with no trees to            
slow him.                                                                         
my attention was focused on him so completely that i did not realize              
what was then to occur until it did.                                              
with a mighty cry, ganelon sprang from somewhere, wrapping his arms               
about benedict and pinning his sword arm to his side.                             
even had i really wanted to, though, i did not have the opportunity to            
kill him then. he was too fast, and ganelon was not aware of the man’s            
strength.                                                                         
benedict twisted to his right, interposing ganelon between us, and at the         
same time brought the stump of his arm around like a club, striking               
ganelon in the left temple. then he pulled his left arm free, seized ganelon      
by his belt, swept him off his feet, and threw him at me. as i stepped aside,     
he retrieved his blade from where it had fallen near his feet and came at me      
again. i barely had time to glance and see that ganelon had landed in a heap      
some ten paces to my rear.                                                        
i parried and resumed my retreat. i only had one trick remaining, and it          
saddened me that if it failed amber would be deprived of its rightful liege.      
it is somewhat more difficult to fence with a good left-hander than a             
good right-hander, and this worked against me also. but i had to experiment       
a bit. there was something i had to learn, even if it meant taking a chance.      
i took a long step back, moving momentarily out of range, then leaned             
forward and attacked. it was a very calculated thing, and very fast.              
one unexpected result, which i am certain was at least partly luck, was           
that i got through, even though i missed my target. for an instant,               
grayswandir rode high off one of his parries and nicked his left ear. this        
slowed him slightly for a few moments, but not enough to matter. if               
anything, it served to strengthen his defense. i continued to press my attack,    
but there was simply no getting through then. it was only a small cut, but        
the blood ran down to his ear lobe and spattered off, a few drops at a time.      
it could even be distracting, if i permitted myself to do more than take note     
of it.                                                                            
then i did what i feared, but had to try. i left him a small opening, just        
for a moment, knowing that he would come right through it toward my               
heart.                                                                            
he did, and i parried it at the last instant. i do not like to think about        
how close he came that time. then i began to yield once more, giving              
ground, backing out of the grove. parrying and retreating, i moved past the       
spot where ganelon lay. i fell back another fifteen feet or so, fighting          
defensively, conservatively.                                                      
then i gave benedict another opening.                                             
he drove in, as he had before, and i managed to stop him again. he                
pressed the attack even harder after that, pushing me back to the edge of the     
black road.                                                                       
there, i stopped and held my ground, shifting my position to the spot i           
had chosen. i would have to hold him just a few moments longer, to set him        
up…                                                                               
they were very rough moments, but i fought furiously and readied                  
myself.                                                                           
then i gave him the same opening again.                                           
i knew he would come in the same as before, and my right leg was                  
across and back behind my left, then straightening, as he did. i gave his         
blade but the barest beat to the side as i sprang backward onto the black         
road, immediately extending my arm full length to discourage a balaestra.         
then he did what i had hoped. he beat at my blade and advanced                    
normally when i dropped it into quarte…                                           
… causing him to step into the patch of black grasses over which i had            
leaped.                                                                           
i dared not look down at first. i simply stood my ground and gave the             
flora a chance.                                                                   
it only took a few moments. benedict became aware of it the next time             
that he tried to move. i saw the puzzled expression flash across his face,        
then the strain. it had him, i knew.                                              
i doubted, though, that it could hold him very long, so i moved                   
immediately.                                                                      
i danced to the right, out of range of his blade, rushed forward and              
sprang across the grasses, off the black road once again. he tried to turn,       
but they had twined themselves about his legs all the way up to his knees.        
he swayed for a moment, but retained his balance.                                 
i passed behind him and to his right. one easy thrust and he was a dead           
man, but of course there was no reason to do it now.                              
he swung his arm back behind his neck and turned his head, pointing               
the blade at me. he began pulling his left leg free.                              
but i feinted toward his right, and when he moved to parry it i slapped           
him across the back of the neck with the flat of grayswandir.                     
it stunned him, and i was able to move in and punch him in the kidney             
with my left hand. he bent slightly and i blocked his sword arm and struck        
him in the back of the neck again, this time with my fist, hard. he fell,         
unconscious, and i removed his blade from his hand and cast it aside. the         
blood from his left ear lobe trailed down his neck like some exotic earring.      
i put grayswandir aside, seized benedict under the armpits, and                   
dragged him back from the black road. the grasses resisted mightily, but i        
strained against them and finally had him free.                                   
ganelon had gotten to his feet by then. he limped up and stood beside             
me, looking down at benedict.                                                     
“what a fellow he is,” he said. “what a fellow he is… what are we                 
going to do with him?”                                                            
i picked him up in a fireman’s carry and stood.                                   
“take him back toward the wagon right now,” i said. “will you bring               
the blades?”                                                                      
“all right.”                                                                      
i headed up the road and benedict remained unconscious—which was                  
good, because i did not want to have to hit him again if i could help it. i       
deposited him at the base of a sturdy tree beside the road near the wagon.        
i resheathed our blades when ganelon came up, and set him to stripping            
ropes from several of the cases. while he did this, i searched benedict and       
found what i was looking for.                                                     
i bound him to the tree then, while ganelon fetched his horse. we                 
tethered it to a nearby bush, upon which i also hung his blade.                   
then i mounted to the driver’s seat of the wagon and ganelon came up              
alongside.                                                                        
“are you just going to leave him there?” he asked.                                
“for now,” i said.                                                                
we moved on up the road. i did not look back, but ganelon did.                    
“he hasn’t moved yet,” he reported. then, “nobody ever just took me               
and threw me like that. with one hand yet.”                                       
“that’s why i told you to wait with the wagon, and not to fight with him          
if i lost.”                                                                       
“what is to become of him now?”                                                   
“i will see that he is taken care of, soon.”                                      
“he will be all right, though?”                                                   
i nodded.                                                                         
“good.”                                                                           
we continued on for perhaps two miles and i halted the horses. i                  
climbed down.                                                                     
“don’t be upset by anything that happens,” i said. “i am going to make            
arrangements for benedict now.” i moved off the road and stood in the             
shade, taking out the deck of trumps benedict had been carrying. i riffled        
through them, located gerard, and removed him from the pack. the rest i           
returned to the silk-lined, wooden case, inlaid with bone, in which benedict      
had carried them.                                                                 
i held gerard’s trump before me and regarded it.                                  
after a time, it grew warm, real, seemed to stir. i felt gerard’s actual          
presence. he was in amber. he was walking down a street that i                    
recognized. he looks a lot like me, only larger, heavier. i saw that he still     
wore his beard.                                                                   
he halted and stared.                                                             
“corwin!”                                                                         
“yes, gerard. you are looking well.”                                              
“your eyes! you can see?”                                                         
“yes, i can see again.”                                                           
“where are you?”                                                                  
“come to me now and i will show you.” his gaze tightened.                         
“i am not certain that i can do that, corwin. i am very involved just             
now.”                                                                             
“it is benedict,” i said. “you are the only one i can trust to help him.”         
“benedict? he is in trouble?”                                                     
“yes.”                                                                            
“then why does he not summon me himself?”                                         
“he is unable to. he is restrained.”                                              
“why? how?”                                                                       
“it is too long and involved to go into now. believe me, he needs your            
help, right away.”                                                                
he raked his beard with his upper teeth. “and you cannot handle it                
yourself?”                                                                        
“absolutely not.”                                                                 
“and you think i can?”                                                            
“i know you can.”                                                                 
he loosened his blade in its scabbard.                                            
“i would not like to think this is some sort of trick, corwin.”                   
“i assure you it is not. with all the time i have had to think, i would           
have come up with something a little more subtle.”                                
he sighed. then he nodded. “all right. i’m coming to you.”                        
“come ahead.”                                                                     
he stood for a moment, then took a step forward.                                  
he stood beside me. he reached out and clasped my shoulder. he                    
smiled.                                                                           
“corwin,” he said. “i’m glad you’ve your eyes back.”                              
i looked away.                                                                    
“so am i. so am i.”                                                               
“who is that in the wagon?”                                                       
“a friend. his name is ganelon.”                                                  
“where is benedict? what is the problem?” i gestured.                             
“back there,” i said. “about two miles down the road. he is bound to a            
tree. his horse is tethered near by.”                                             
“then why are you here?”                                                          
“i am fleeing.”                                                                   
“from what?”                                                                      
“benedict. i’m the one who bound him.”                                            
he wrinkled his brow. “i do not understand…”                                      
i shook my head.                                                                  
“there is a misunderstanding between us. i could not reason with him              
and we fought. i knocked him unconscious and i tied him up. i cannot free         
him, or he would attack me again. neither can i leave him as he is. he may        
come to some harm before he can free himself. so i summoned you. please           
go to him, release him, and see him home.”                                        
“what will you be doing the while?”                                               
“getting the hell out of here, losing myself in shadow. you will be               
doing both of us a favor to keep him from trying to follow me again. i do         
not want to have to fight him a second time.”                                     
“i see. now will you tell me what happened?”                                      
“i am not certain. he called me a murderer. i give you my word i slew             
no one the whole time i was in avalon. please tell him i said that. i have no     
reason to lie to you, and i swear that it is true. there is another matter        
which may have disturbed him somewhat. if he mentions it, tell him that he        
will have to rely on dara’s explanation.”                                         
“and what is it?”                                                                 
i shrugged.                                                                       
“you will know if he mentions it. if he does not, forget it.”                     
“dara, you say?”                                                                  
“yes.”                                                                            
“very well, i shall do as you have asked… now, will you tell me how               
you managed your escape from amber?”                                              
i smiled.                                                                         
“academic interest? or do you feel you might have need of the route               
yourself one day?”                                                                
he chuckled.                                                                      
“it strikes me as a handy piece of information to have.”                          
“i regret, dear brother, that the world is not yet ready for this                 
knowledge. if i had to tell anyone, i would tell you-but there is no way it       
could benefit you, whereas its secrecy may serve me in the future.”               
“in other words, you have a private way into and out of amber. what               
are you planning, corwin?”                                                        
“what do you think?”                                                              
“the answer is obvious. but my feelings on the matter are mixed.”                 
“care to tell me about them?”                                                     
he gestured toward a section of the black road that was visible from              
where we stood.                                                                   
“that thing,” he said. “it runs to the foot of kolvir now. a variety of           
menaces travel it to attack amber. we defend, we are always victorious.           
but the attacks grow stronger and they come more frequently. now would            
not be a good time for you to move, corwin.”                                      
“or it might be the perfect time,” i said.                                        
“for you then, but not necessarily for amber.”                                    
“how has eric been handling the situation?”                                       
“adequately. as i said, we are always victorious.”                                
“i do not mean the attacks. i mean the entire problem—its cause.”                 
“i have traveled the black road myself, going a great distance along it.”         
“and?”                                                                            
“i was unable to go the entire distance. you know how the shadows                 
grow wilder and stranger the farther you get from amber?”                         
“yes.”                                                                            
“…until the mind itself is twisted and turned toward madness?”                    
“yes.”                                                                            
“…and somewhere beyond this lie the courts of chaos. the road goes                
on, corwin. i am convinced that it runs the entire distance.”                     
“then it is as i feared,” i said.                                                 
“that is why, whether i sympathize with you or not, i do not                      
recommend the present time for your efforts. the security of amber must           
come before all else.”                                                            
“i see. then there is nothing more to be said just now.”                          
“and your plans?”                                                                 
“since you do not know what they are, it is meaningless to tell you that          
they are unchanged. but they are unchanged.”                                      
“i do not know whether to wish you luck, but i wish you well. i am glad           
that you have your sight back.” he clasped my hand. “i had best get on to         
benedict now. i take it he is not badly hurt?”                                    
“not by me. i only hit him a few times. do not forget to give him my              
message.”                                                                         
“i won’t.”                                                                        
“and take him back to avalon.”                                                    
“i will try.”                                                                     
“then good-by for now, gerard.”                                                   
“good-by, corwin.”                                                                
he turned then and walked on down the road. i watched until he was out            
of sight before i returned to the wagon. then i replaced his trump in the         
deck and continued on my way to antwerp.                                          
                                                                     
chapter 8                                                                         
i stood on the hilltop and looked down at the house. there was shrubbery          
all about me, so i was not especially obtrusive.                                  
i do not really know what i expected to see. a burned-out shell? a car            
in the driveway? a family scattered about the redwood patio furniture?            
armed guards?                                                                     
i saw that the roof could use some new slate, that the lawn had long ago          
returned to a natural condition. i was surprised that i could see only one        
broken window there in the rear.                                                  
so the place was supposed to look deserted. i wondered.                           
i spread my jacket on the ground and seated myself on it. i lit a                 
cigarette. there were no other houses for quite a distance.                       
i had gotten close to seven hundred thousand dollars for the diamonds.            
it had taken me a week and a half to make the deal. from antwerp we had           
traveled to brussels, spending several evenings at a club on the rue de           
char et pain before the man i wanted found me.                                    
arthur was quite puzzled by the arrangement. a slight, white-haired               
man with a neat mustache, ex-raf officer, oxonian, he had begun shaking           
his head after the first two minutes and kept interrupting me with questions      
about delivery. while he was no sir basil zaharoff, he became genuinely           
concerned when a client’s ideas sounded too half-baked. it troubled him if        
something went sour too soon after delivery. he seemed to think it reflected      
back on him in some way. for this reason, he was often more helpful than          
the others when it came to shipment. he was concerned about my plans for          
transportation because i did not seem to have any.                                
what one generally requires in an arrangement of this sort is an end-use          
certificate. what it is, basically, is a document affirming that country x has    
ordered the weapons in question. you need the thing in order to get an            
export permit from the manufacturer’s country. this keeps them looking            
honest, even if the shipment should be re-consigned to country y once it          
has crossed their border. the customary thing to do is to buy the assistance      
of an ambassadorial representative of country x-preferably one with               
relatives or friends connected with the defense department back home—in           
order to get the papers. they come high, and i believe arthur had a list of       
all the going rates in his head.                                                  
“but how are you going to ship them?” he had kept asking. “how will               
you get them where you want them?”                                                
“that,” i said, “will be my problem. let me worry about it.” but he kept          
shaking his head.                                                                 
“it is no good trying to cut corners that way, colonel,” he said. (i had          
been a colonel to him since we had first met, some dozen years before.            
why, i am not certain.) “no good at all. try to save a few dollars that way       
and you might lose the whole shipment and wind up in real trouble. now i          
can fix you up through one of these young african nations quite                   
reasonably-”                                                                      
“no. just fix me up with the weapons.”                                            
during our talk, ganelon just sat there drinking beer, as red-bearded and         
sinister-looking as ever, and nodding to everything that i said. as he spoke      
no english, he had no idea as to the state of negotiations. nor, for that         
matter, did he really care. he followed my instructions, though, and spoke        
to me periodically in thari and we would chat briefly in that language about      
nothing in particular. sheer perversity. poor old arthur was a good linguist      
and he wanted to know the destination of the pieces. i could feel him             
straining to identify the language each time that we spoke. finally, he began     
nodding as though he had.                                                         
after some more discussion, he stuck his neck out and said, “i read the           
newspapers. i am certain his crowd can afford the insurance.” that was            
almost worth the price of admission to me.                                        
but, “no,” i said. “believe me, when i take possession of those                   
automatic rifles, they are going to vanish off the face of the earth.”            
“neat trick, that,” he said, “considering i don’t even know where we              
will be picking them up yet.”                                                     
“it does not matter.”                                                             
“confidence is a fine thing. then there is foolhardiness…” he                     
shrugged. “have it as you say then—your problem.”                                 
then i told him about the ammo and he must have been convinced as to              
my mental deterioration. he just stared at me for a long while, not even          
shaking his head this time. it was a good ten minutes before i could even         
get him to look at the specifications. it was then that he began shaking his      
head and mumbling about silver bullets and inert primers.                         
the ultimate arbiter, cash, convinced him we would do it my way,                  
however. there was no trouble on the rifles or the trucks, but persuading an      
arms factory to produce my ammo was going to be expensive, he told me.            
he was not even certain he could find one that would be willing. when i           
told him that the cost was no object, it seemed to upset him even more. if i      
could afford to indulge in weird, experimental ammo, an end-use certificate       
would not come to that much—no. i told him no. my way, i reminded him.            
he sighed and tugged at the fringe of his mustache. then he nodded.               
very well, we would do it my way.                                                 
he overcharged me, of course. since i was rational in all other matters,          
the alternative to psychosis would be that i was party to an expensive            
boondoggle. while the ramifications must have intrigued him, he                   
apparently decided not to look too far into such a sticky-seeming enterprise.     
he was willing to seize every opportunity i extended for dissociating             
himself from the project. once he found the ammo people—a swiss outfit            
as it turned out—he was quite willing to put me into contact with them and        
wash his hands of everything but the money.                                       
ganelon and i went to switzerland on fake papers. he was a german                 
and i was portuguese. i did not especially care what my papers showed, so         
long as the forgery was of good quality, but i had settled on german as the       
best language for ganelon to learn, since he had to learn one and german          
tourists have always seemed to be all over the place. he picked it up quite       
rapidly. i had told him to tell any real germans and any swiss who asked          
that he had been raised in finland.                                               
we spent three weeks in switzerland before i was satisfied with the               
quality controls on my ammo. as i had suspected, the stuff was totally inert      
in this shadow. i had worked out the formula, though, which was all that          
really mattered at that point. the silver came high, of course. perhaps i was     
being over-cautious. still, there are some things about amber that are best       
dispatched with that metal, and i could afford it. for that matter, what better   
bullet—short of gold—for a king? should i wind up shooting eric, there            
would be no lese-majeste involved. indulge me, brothers.                          
then i left ganelon to shift for himself for a time, since he had thrown          
himself into his tourist role in a true stanislavskian fashion. i saw him off to  
italy, camera about his neck and a faraway look in his eyes, and i flew back      
to the states.                                                                    
back? yes. that run-down place on the hillside below me had been my               
home for the better part of a decade. i had been heading toward it when i         
was forced off the road and into the accident which led to everything which       
has since occurred.                                                               
i drew on my cigarette and regarded the place. it had not been run-down           
then. i had always kept it in good shape. the place had been completely           
paid for. six rooms and an attached two-car garage. around seven acres.           
the whole hillside, actually. i had lived there alone most of the time. i had     
liked it. i had spent much of my time in the den and in my workshop. i            
wondered whether the mori woodcut still hung in my study. face to face it         
was called, and it depicted two warriors in mortal combat. it would be nice       
to have it back. it would be gone, though, i felt. probably everything that       
had not been stolen had been sold for back taxes. i imagined that was what        
the state of new york would do. i was surprised that the house itself             
seemed not to have acquired new occupants. i kept watching, to make               
certain. hell, i was in no hurry. there was no place else i had to be.            
i had contacted gerard shortly after my arrival in belgium. i had                 
decided against trying to talk with benedict for the time being. i was afraid     
that he would simply try to attack me, one way or the other, if i did.            
gerard had studied me quite carefully. he was out somewhere in open               
country and he seemed to be alone. “corwin?” he had said, then, “yes…”            
“right. what happened with benedict?”                                             
“i found him as you said he would be and i released him. he was set to            
pursue you once again, but i was able to persuade him that a considerable         
time had passed since i had seen you. since you said you had left him             
unconscious, i figured that was the best line to take. also, his horse was        
very tired. we went back to avalon together. i remained with him through          
the funerals, then borrowed a horse. i am on my way back to amber now.”           
“funerals? what funerals?”                                                        
again, that calculating look.                                                     
“you really do not know?” he said.                                                
“if i knew, damn it, i would not ask!”                                            
“his servants. they were murdered. he says you did it”                            
“no,” i said. “no. that is ridiculous. why should i want to murder his            
servants? i do not understand…”                                                   
“it was not long after his return that he went looking for them, as they          
were not on hand to welcome him. he found them murdered and you and               
your companion gone.”                                                             
“now i see how it looked,” i said. “where were the bodies?”                       
“buried, but not too deeply, in the little wood behind the garden to the          
rear of the house.”                                                               
just so, just so… better not to mention i had known about the grave.              
“but what possible reason does he think i could have for doing such a             
thing?” i protested.                                                              
“he is puzzled, corwin. very puzzled, now. he could not understand                
why you did not kill him when you had the chance, and why you sent for            
me when you could have just left him there.”                                      
“i see now why he kept calling me a murderer as we fought, but—did                
you tell him what i said about not having slain anyone?”                          
“yes. at first he shrugged it off as a self-serving statement. i told him         
you sounded sincere, and very puzzled yourself. i believe it bothered him a       
bit that you should be so insistent. he asked me several times whether i          
believed you.”                                                                    
“do you?”                                                                         
he dropped his eyes.                                                              
“damn it, corwin! what am i supposed to believe? i came into the                  
middle of this. we have been apart for so long…”                                  
he met my gaze.                                                                   
“there is more to it,” he said.                                                   
“what is that?”                                                                   
“why did you call me to help him? that was a complete deck you took.              
you could have called any of us.”                                                 
“you must be joking,” i said.                                                     
“no, i want an answer.”                                                           
“very well. you are the only other one i trust.”                                  
“is that all?”                                                                    
“no. benedict does not want his whereabouts known back in amber.                  
you and julian are the only two i know for certain to be aware of his             
location. i don’t like julian, i don’t trust him. so i called you.”               
“how did you know that julian and i knew about him?”                              
“he helped you both out when you ran into trouble on the black road               
awhile back, and he put you up while you recuperated. dara told me about          
it.”                                                                              
“dara? who is this dara anyway?”                                                  
“the orphaned daughter of a couple who once worked for benedict,” i               
said. “she was around when you and julian were there.”                            
“and you sent her a bracelet. you also mentioned her to me by the road,           
back when you summoned me.”                                                       
“correct. what is the matter?”                                                    
“nothing. i do not really remember her, though. tell me, why did you              
leave so suddenly? you have to admit, it seemed the act of a guilty man.”         
“yes,” i said, “i was guilty—but not of murder. i went to avalon to               
obtain something that i wanted, i got it, and i cleared out. you saw that         
wagon, and you saw that i had a cargo in it. i got out before he returned to      
keep from answering questions benedict might ask me about it. hell! if i          
just wanted to run, i wouldn’t go dragging a wagon along behind me! i’d           
have traveled on horseback, fast and light.”                                      
“what was in the wagon?”                                                          
“no,” i said. “i did not want to tell benedict and i do not want to tell          
you. oh, he can find out, i suppose. but let him do it the hard way, if he        
must. it is immaterial, though. the fact i went there for something and           
really obtained it should be sufficient. it is not especially valuable there, but 
is in another place. fair enough?”                                                
“yes,” he said. “it does make a kind of sense.”                                   
“then answer my question. do you think i murdered them?”                          
“no,” he said. “i believe you.”                                                   
“what about benedict, now? what does he think?”                                   
“he would not attack you again without talking first. there is doubt in           
his mind, i know that.”                                                           
“good. that’s something, anyway. thank you, gerard. i am going away               
now.” i moved to break the contact                                                
“wait, corwin! wait!”                                                             
“what is it?”                                                                     
“how did you cut the black road? you destroyed a section of it at the             
place you crossed over. how did you do it?”                                       
“the pattern,” i said. “if you ever get in trouble with that thing, hit it        
with the pattern. you know how you have to sometimes hold it in your              
mind if shadows begin to run away from you and things start going wild?”          
“yes. i tried that and it didn’t work. all i got was a headache. it is not of     
shadow.”                                                                          
“yes and no,” i said. “i know what it is. you did not try hard enough. i          
used the pattern until my head felt as if it were being torn apart, until i was   
half blind from the pain and about ready to pass out. then the road came          
apart about me instead. it was no fun, but it did work.”                          
“i will remember,” he said. “are you going to talk to benedict now?”              
“no,” i said. “he already has everything we’ve gone over. now that he             
is cooling off, he will begin pushing the facts around some more. i would         
just as soon he do it on his own—and i do not want to risk another fight.         
when i close this time i will be silent for a long while. i will resist all       
efforts to communicate with me, also.”                                            
“what of amber, corwin? what of amber?”                                           
i dropped my eyes.                                                                
“don’t get in my way when i come back, gerard. believe me, it will be             
no contest.”                                                                      
“corwin… wait. i’d like to ask you to reconsider. do not hit amber                
now. she is weak in all the wrong ways.”                                          
“i am sorry, gerard. but i am certain i have given the matter more                
thought during the past five years than all the rest of you put together.”        
“i am sorry, too, then.”                                                          
“i guess i had better be going now.”                                              
he nodded.                                                                        
“good-by, corwin.”                                                                
“good-by, gerard.”                                                                
after waiting several hours for the sun to disappear behind the hill, leaving     
the house in a premature twilight, i mashed a final cigarette, shook out my       
jacket and donned it, rose to my feet. there had been no signs of life about      
the place, no movement behind the dirty windows, the broken window.               
slowly, i descended the hill.                                                     
flora’s place out in westchester had been sold some years before, which           
came as no surprise to me. i had checked merely as a matter of curiosity,         
since i was back in town. had even driven past the place once. there was          
no reason for her to remain on this shadow earth. her long wardenship             
having ended successfully, she was being rewarded in amber the last time i        
had seen her. to have been so near for as long as i had without even              
realizing her presence was a thing i found somewhat galling.                      
i had debated contacting random, decided against it. the only way he              
could possibly benefit me would be with information as to current affairs in      
amber. while this would be nice to have, it was not absolutely essential. i       
was fairly certain that i could trust him. after all, he had been of some         
assistance to me in the past. admitted, it was hardly altruism—but still, he      
had gone a bit further than he had had to. it was five years ago, though, and     
a lot had happened since. he was being tolerated around amber again, and          
he had a wife now. he might be eager to gain a little standing. i just did not    
know. but weighing the possible benefits against the possible losses, i           
thought it better to wait and see him personally the next time i was in town.     
i had kept my word and resisted all attempts to make contact with me.             
they had come almost daily during my first two weeks back on the shadow           
earth. several weeks had passed, though, and i had not been troubled since.       
why should i give anyone a free shot at my thinking machinery? no                 
thanks, brothers.                                                                 
i advanced upon the rear of the house, sidled up to a window, wiped it            
with my elbow. i had been watching the place for three days, and it struck        
me as very unlikely that anyone was inside. still… i peered in.                   
it was a mess, of course, and a lot of my stuff was missing. but some of          
it was still there. i moved to my right and tried the door. locked. i             
chuckled.                                                                         
i walked around to the patio. ninth brick in, fourth brick up. the key            
was still beneath it. i wiped it on my jacket as i walked back. i let myself in.  
there was dust on everything, but it had been disturbed in some places.           
there were coffee containers, sandwich wrappers, and the remains of a             
petrified hamburger in the fireplace. a lot of weather had found its way          
down that chimney in my absence. i crossed over and closed the damper.            
i saw that the front door had been broken about the lock. i tried it. it          
seemed to be nailed shut. there was an obscenity scrawled on the wall in          
the foyer. i walked on into the kitchen. it was a total mess. anything that       
had survived plunder was on the floor. the stove and the refrigerator were        
gone, the floor scarred where they had been pushed along.                         
i backed away, went and checked my workshop. yes, it had been                     
stripped. completely. passing on, i was surprised to find my bed, still           
unmade, and two expensive chairs all intact in my bedroom.                        
my study was a more pleasant surprise. the big desk was covered with              
the litter and muss, but then it always had been. lighting a cigarette, i went    
and sat behind it. i guess it was just too heavy and bulky for anyone to          
make off with. my books were all on their shelves. nobody steals books but        
your friends. and there—                                                          
i could not believe it. i got to my feet again and crossed the room to            
stare at close range.                                                             
yoshitoshi mori’s beautiful woodcut hung right where it had always                
been, clean, stark, elegant, violent. to think that no one had made off with      
one of my most prized possessions…                                                
clean?                                                                            
i scrutinized it. i ran my finger along the frame.                                
too clean. it bore none of the dust and grit which covered everything             
else in the house.                                                                
i checked it for trip wires, found none, removed it from its hook,                
lowered it.                                                                       
no, the wall was no lighter behind it. it matched the rest of the wall            
perfectly.                                                                        
i put mori’s work on the window seat and returned to my desk. i was               
troubled, as someone doubtless intended me to be. someone had obviously           
removed it and taken good care of it—a thing for which i was not                  
ungrateful—and then only just recently restored it. it was as if my return        
had been anticipated.                                                             
which should be adequate reason for immediate flight, i suppose. but              
that was silly. if it was part of some trap, it had already been sprung. i        
jerked the automatic from my jacket pocket and tucked it behind my belt. i        
had not even known that i would be coming back myself. it was just                
something i had decided to do since i had had some time on my hands. i            
was not even certain as to why i had wanted to see the place again.               
so this was some sort of contingency arrangement. if i should come by             
the old homestead, it might be to obtain the only thing in the place worth        
having. so preserve it and display it so that i will have to take notice. all     
right, i had. i had not been attacked yet, so it did not seem a trap. what        
then? a message. some sort of a message. what? how? and who?                      
the safest place in the house, had it remained unravaged, should still be         
the safe. it was not beyond any of my siblings’ skill. i moved to the rear        
wall, pressed the panel loose, and swung it out. i spun the dial through its      
combination, stepped back, opened the door with my old swagger stick.             
no explosion. good. not that i had expected any.                                  
there had been nothing of any great value inside—a few hundred                    
dollars in cash, some bonds, receipts, correspondence.                            
an envelope. a fresh, white envelope lay in plain sight. i did not                
remember it.                                                                      
my name upon it, written in an elegant hand. not with ballpoint either.           
it contained a letter and a card.                                                 
brother corwin, the letter said, if you are reading this, then we                 
still think enough alike for me to be able to anticipate you                      
somewhat. i thank you for the loan of the woodcut—one of two                      
possible reasons, as i see it, for your returning to this squalid                 
shadow. i am loathe to relinquish it, as our tastes are also somewhat             
akin and it has graced my chambers for several years now. there is                
something to the subject that strikes a familiar chord. its return is to          
be taken as evidence of my good will and a bid for your attention.                
in that i must be honest with you if i am to stand a chance of                    
convincing you of anything, i will not apologize for what has been                
done. my only regret, actually, is that i did not kill you when i                 
should have. vanity it was, that played me for a fool. while time may             
have healed your eyes, i doubt it will ever significantly alter our               
feelings for one another. your letter—“i’ll be back”—lies upon my                 
writing table at this moment. had i written it, i know that i would be            
back. some things being equal between us, i anticipate your return,               
and not without somewhat of apprehension. knowing you for no                      
fool, i contemplate your arriving in force.                                       
and here is where past vanity is paid of present pride. i would                   
have peace between us, corwin, for the sake of the realm, not my                  
own. strong forces out of shadow have come to beset amber                         
regularly, and i do not fully understand their nature. against these              
forces, the most formidable in my memory ever to assail amber, the                
family has united behind me. i would like to have your support in                 
this struggle. failing that, i request that you forbear invading me               
for a time. if you elect to assist, i will require no homage of you,              
simply acknowledgment of my leadership for the duration of the                    
crisis. you will be accorded your normal honors. it is important that             
you contact me to see the truth of what i say. as i have failed to                
reach you by means of your trump, i enclose my own for your use.                  
while the possibility that i am lying to you is foremost in your mind,            
i give you my word that i am not.                                                 
—eric, lord of amber.                                                             
i reread it and chuckled. what did he think curses were for, anyway?              
no good, my brother. it was kind of you to think of me in your moment             
of need—and i believe you, never doubt it, for we are all of us honorable         
men—but our meeting will come according to my schedule, not yours. as             
for amber, i am not unmindful of her needs, and i will deal with them in          
my own time and fashion. you make the mistake, eric, of considering               
yourself necessary. the graveyards are filled with men who thought they           
could not be replaced. i will wait though, to tell you this, face to face.        
i tucked his letter and the trump in my jacket pocket. i killed my                
cigarette in the dirty ashtray on my desk. then i fetched some linen from         
the bedroom to wrap my combatants. they would wait for me in a safer              
place, this time.                                                                 
as i passed through the house once again, i wondered why i had come               
back, really. i thought of some of the people i had known when i had lived        
there, and wondered whether they ever thought of me, whether they                 
wondered what had become of me. i would never know, of course.                    
night had begun and the sky was clear and its first stars bright as i             
stepped outside and locked the door behind me. i went around to the side          
and returned the key to its place beneath the patio. then i mounted the hill.     
when i looked back from the top, the house seemed to have shrunken                
there in the darkness, to have become a piece of the desolation, like an          
empty beer can tossed beside the road. i crossed over and down, heading           
across a field toward the place where i had parked, wishing i had not looked      
back.                                                                             
                                                                     
chapter 9                                                                         
ganelon and i departed switzerland in a pair of trucks. we had driven             
them there from belgium, and i had taken the rifles in mine. figuring ten         
pounds per piece, the three hundred had come to around a ton and a half,          
which was not bad. after we took on the armmo, we still had plenty of             
room for fuel and other supplies. we had taken a short cut through shadow,        
of course, to avoid the people who wait around borders to delay traffic. we       
departed in the same fashion, with me in the lead to open the way, so to          
speak.                                                                            
i led us through a land of dark hills and narrow villages, where the only         
vehicles we passed were horse-drawn. when the sky grew bright lemon, the          
beasts of burden were striped and feathered. we drove for hours, finally          
encountering the black road, paralleling it for a time, then heading off in       
another direction. the skies went through a dozen shiftings, and the              
contours of the land melted and merged from hill to plain and back again.         
we crept along poor roads and skidded on flats as smooth and hard as glass.       
we edged our way across a mountain’s face and skirted a wine-dark sea. we         
passed through storms and fogs.                                                   
it took me half a day to find them once again, or a shadow so close that          
it made no difference. yes, those whom i had exploited once before. they          
were short fellows, very hairy, very dark, with long incisors and retractable     
claws. but they had trigger fingers, and they worshiped me. they were             
overjoyed at my return. it little mattered that five years earlier i had sent the 
cream of their manhood off to die in a strange land. the gods are not to be       
questioned, but loved, honored, and obeyed. they were quite disappointed          
that i only wanted a few hundred. i had to turn away thousands of                 
volunteers. the morality of it did not especially trouble me this time. one       
way of looking at it might be that by employing this group i was seeing to it     
that the others had not died in vain. of course i did not look at it that way,    
but i enjoy exercises in sophistry. i suppose i might also consider them          
mercenaries being paid in spiritual coin. what difference did it make             
whether they fought for money or for a belief? i was capable of supplying         
either one when i needed troops.                                                  
actually, though, these would be pretty safe, being the only ones in the          
place with fire power. my ammo was still inert in their homeland, however,        
and it took several days of marching through shadow to reach a land               
sufficiently like amber for it to become functional. the only catch was that      
shadows follow a law of congruency of correspondences, so that the place          
actually was close to amber. this kept me somewhat on edge throughout             
their training. it was unlikely that a brother would blunder through that         
shadow. still, worse coincidences have occurred.                                  
we drilled for close to three weeks before i decided we were ready.               
then, on a bright, crisp morning, we broke camp and moved on into                 
shadow, the columns of troops following behind the trucks. the trucks             
would cease to function when we neared amber—they were already giving             
us some trouble—but they might as well be used to haul the equipment as           
far along as possible.                                                            
this time, i intended to go over the top of kolvir from the north, rather         
than essay its seaward face again. all of the men had an understanding of         
the layout, and the disposition of the rifle squads had already been              
determined and run through in practice.                                           
we halted for lunch, ate well, and continued on, the shadows slowly               
slipping away about us. the sky became a dark but brilliant blue, the sky of      
amber. the earth was black among rocks and the bright green of the grass.         
the trees and the shrubs had a moist lucency to their foliage. the air was        
sweet and clean.                                                                  
by nightfall, we were passing among the massive trees at the fringes of           
arden. we bivouacked there, posting a very heavy guard. ganelon, now              
wearing khakis and a beret, sat with me long into the night, going over the       
maps i had drawn. we still had about forty miles to go before we hit the          
mountains.                                                                        
the trucks gave out the following afternoon. they went through several            
transformations, stalled repeatedly, and finally refused to start at all. we      
pushed them into a ravine and cut branches to cover them over. we                 
distributed the ammo and the rest of the rations and continued on.                
we departed the hard, dirt roadway after that and worked our way                  
through the woods themselves. as i still knew them well, it was less of a         
problem than it might have been. it slowed us, naturally, but lessened            
chances of surprise by one of julian’s patrols. the trees were quite large, as    
we were well into arden proper, and the topography sprang back into mind          
as we moved.                                                                      
we encountered nothing more menacing than foxes, deer, rabbits, and               
squirrels that day. the smells of the place and its green, gold, and brown        
brought back thoughts of happier times. near sunset, i scaled a forest giant      
and was able to make out the range that held kolvir. a storm was playing          
about its peaks just then and its clouds hid their highest portions.              
the following noon we ran into one of julian’s patrols. i do not really           
know who surprised whom, or who was more surprised. the firing broke              
out almost immediately. i shouted myself hoarse stopping it, as everyone          
seemed anxious to try out his weapon on a live target. it was a small group       
—a dozen and a half men—and we got all of them. we suffered only one              
minor casualty, from one of our men wounding another—or perhaps the               
man had wounded himself. i never got the story straight. we moved on              
quickly then, because we had made a hell of a racket and i had no idea as to      
the disposition of other forces in the vicinity.                                  
we gained considerable distance and altitude by nightfall, and the                
mountains were in sight whenever there was a clear line of vision. the            
storm clouds still clung to their peaks. my troops were excited over the          
day’s slaughter and took a long while getting to sleep that night.                
the next day we reached the foothills, successfully avoiding two                  
patrols. i pushed us on and up well after nightfall, to reach a place of cover    
i had had in mind. we bedded down at an altitude perhaps half a mile              
higher than we had the previous night. we were under the cloud cover, but         
there was no rainfall, despite a constant atmospheric tension of the sort that    
precedes a storm. i did not sleep well that night. i dreamed of the burning       
cat head, and of lorraine.                                                        
in the morning, we moved out under gray skies, and i pushed the troops            
remorselessly, heading steadily upward. we heard the sounds of distant            
thunder, and the air was alive and electric.                                      
about mid-morning, as i led our file up a twisted, rocky route, i heard a         
shout from behind me, followed by several bursts of gunfire. i headed back        
immediately.                                                                      
a small knot of men, ganelon among them, stood staring down at                    
something, talking in low voices. i pushed my way through.                        
i could not believe it. never in my memory had one been seen this near            
to amber. perhaps twelve feet in length, bearing that terrible parody of a        
human face on the shoulders of a lion, eagle-like wings folded above its          
now bloody sides, a still-twitching tail like that of a scorpion, i had           
glimpsed the manticora once in isles far to the south, a frightful beast that     
had always held a spot near the top on my unclean list.                           
“it tore rall in half, it tore rall in half,” one of the men kept repeating.      
about twenty paces away, i saw what was left of rail. we covered him              
over with a tarp and weighted it down with rocks. that was really about all       
that we could do. if nothing else, it served to restore a quality of wariness     
that had seemed to vanish after the previous day’s easy victory. the men          
were silent and cautious as we continued on our way.                              
“quite a thing, that,” ganelon said. “has it the intelligence of a man?”          
“i do not really know.”                                                           
“i’ve a funny, nervous feeling, corwin. as though something terrible is           
about to happen. i don’t know how else to put it.”                                
“i know.”                                                                         
“you feel it, too?”                                                               
“yes.”                                                                            
he nodded.                                                                        
“maybe it’s the weather,” i said. he nodded again, more slowly.                   
the sky continued to darken as we climbed, and the thunder never                  
ceased. flashes of heat lightning occurred in the west, and the winds grew        
stronger. looking up, i could see great masses of clouds about the higher         
peaks. black, bird-like shapes were constantly outlined against them.             
we encountered another manticora later, but we dispatched it with no              
damage to ourselves. about an hour later, we were attacked by a flock of          
large, razor-beaked birds, the like of which i had never seen before. we          
succeeded in driving them off, but this, too, disturbed me.                       
we kept climbing, wondering when the storm was going to begin. the                
winds increased in velocity.                                                      
it grew quite dark, though i knew the sun had not yet set. the air took           
on a misty, hazy quality as we neared the cloud clusters. a feeling of            
dampness worked it way into everything. the rocks were more slippery. i           
was tempted to call a halt, but we were still a good distance from kolvir         
and i did not want to strain the rations situation, which i had calculated        
quite carefully.                                                                  
we achieved perhaps another four miles and several thousand feet in               
elevation before we were forced to stop. it was pitch black by then, the only     
illumination at all coming from the intermittent flashes of lightning. we         
camped in a large circle on a hard, bare slope, sentries all about the            
perimeter. the thunder came like long flourishes of martial music. the            
temperature plummeted. even had i permitted fires, there was nothing              
burnable about. we settled down for a cold, clammy, dark time.                    
the manticoras attacked several hours later, sudden and silent. seven             
men died and we killed sixteen of the beasts. i have no idea how many             
others fled. i cursed eric as i bound my wounds and wondered from what            
shadow he had drawn the things.                                                   
during what passed for morning, we advanced perhaps five miles toward             
kolvir before bearing off to the west. it was one of three possible routes we     
could follow, and i had always considered it the best for a possible attack.      
the birds came to plague us again, several times, with greater numbers and        
persistency. shooting a few of them, though, was all it took to route the         
entire flock.                                                                     
finally, we rounded the base of a huge escarpment, our way taking us              
outward and upward through thunder and mist, until we were afforded a             
sudden vista, sweeping down and out for dozens of miles across the valley         
of garnath that lay to our right.                                                 
i called a halt and moved forward to observe.                                     
when last i had seen that once lovely valley, it had been a twisted               
wilderness. now, things were even worse. the black road cut through it,           
running to the base of kolvir itself, where it halted. a battle was raging        
within the valley. mounted forces swirled together, engaged, wheeled away.        
lines of foot soldiers advanced, met, fell back. the lightning kept flashing      
and striking among them. the dark birds swept about them like ashes on the        
wind.                                                                             
the dampness lay like a cold blanket. the echoes of the thunder                   
bounced about the peaks. i stared, puzzling, at the conflict far below.           
the distance was too great for me to determine the combatants. at first           
it occurred to me that someone else might be about the same thing i was—          
that perhaps bleys had survived and returned with a new army.                     
but no. these were coming in from the west, along the black road. and             
i saw now that the birds accompanied them, and bounding forms that were           
neither horses nor men. the manticoras, perhaps.                                  
the lightnings fell upon them as they came, scattering, burning,                  
blasting. as i realized that they never struck near the defenders, i recalled     
that eric had apparently gained some measure of control over that device          
known as the jewel of judgment, with which dad had exercised his will             
upon the weather about amber. eric had employed it against us with                
considerable effect five years earlier.                                           
so the forces from shadow about which i had been hearing reports,                 
were even stronger than i had thought. i had envisioned harassment, but not       
a pitched battle at the foot of kolvir. i looked down at the movements            
within the blackness. the road seemed almost to writhe from the activity          
about it.                                                                         
ganelon came and stood beside me. he was silent for a long while.                 
i did not want him to ask me, but i felt powerless to say it except as            
answer to a question.                                                             
“what now, corwin?”                                                               
“we must increase the pace,” i said. “i want to be in amber tonight.”             
we moved again. the going was better for a time, and that helped. the             
storm without rain continued, its lightnings and thunders increasing in           
brilliance and volume. we moved through a constant twilight.                      
when we came to a safe-seeming place later that afternoon—a place                 
within five miles of the northern skirts of amber—i halted us again, for rest     
and a final meal. we had to scream at one another in order to be heard, so i      
could not address the men. i simply passed the word along concerning our          
proximity and the need for readiness.                                             
i took my rations with me and scouted on ahead while the others rested.           
about a mile farther along, i mounted a steep upturn, pausing when i              
achieved its crest. there was a battle of some sort in progress on the slopes     
ahead.                                                                            
i kept out of sight and observed. a force out of amber was engaged                
with a larger body of attackers which must have either preceded us up the         
slope or arrived by different means. i suspected the latter, inasmuch as we       
had seen no signs of recent passage. the engagement explained our own             
good fortune in not encountering defensive patrols on the way up.                 
i moved nearer. while the attackers could have come up by one of the              
two other routes, i saw additional evidence that this need not have been the      
case. they were still arriving, and it was a most fearsome sight, for they        
were airborne.                                                                    
they swept in from the west like great gusts of windblown leaves. the             
aerial movement i had witnessed from the distance had been of greater             
variety than the belligerent bird life. the attackers came in on winged, two-     
legged, dragon-like creatures, the closest parallel with which i was familiar     
being a heraldic beast, the wyvern. i had never seen a non-decorative             
wyvern before, but then i had never felt any great desire to go looking for       
one.                                                                              
among the defenders were numerous archers, who took a deadly toll of              
these in flight. sheets of pure hell erupted among them also, as the              
lightnings flashed and flared, sending them like cinders toward the ground.       
but still they came on, landing, so that both man and beast could attack          
those entrenched. i looked for and located the pulsating glow given off by        
the jewel of judgment when it has been tuned to operate. it came from the         
midst of the largest body of defenders, dug in near the base of a high cliff.     
i stared and studied, focusing on the wearer of the gem. yes, there could         
be no doubt. it was eric.                                                         
on my belly now, i crawled even farther. i saw the leader of the nearest          
party of defenders behead a landing wyvern with a single sword stroke.            
with his left hand, he seized the harness of its rider and hurled him over        
thirty feet, out beyond the lip-like brink of the place. as he turned then to     
shout an order, i saw that it was gerard. he appeared to be leading a             
flanking assault on a mass of the attackers who were assailing the forces at      
the foot of the cliff. on its far side, a similar body of troops was doing        
likewise. another of my brothers?                                                 
i wondered how long the battle had been in progress, both in the valley           
and here above. quite a while, i guessed, considering the duration of the         
unnatural storm.                                                                  
i moved to the right, turning my attention to the west. the battle in the         
valley continued unabated. from this distance, it was impossible to tell who      
was who, let alone who was winning. i could see, though, that no new              
forces were arriving from out of the west to supplement the attackers.            
i was perplexed as to my own best course of action. clearly, i could not          
attack eric when he was engaged in anything this crucial to the defense of        
amber herself. waiting to pick up the pieces afterward might be wisest.           
however, i could already feel the rat teeth of doubt at work on that idea.        
even without reinforcements for the attackers, the outcome of the                 
encounter was by no means clear-cut. the invaders were strong, numerous.          
i had no idea as to what eric might have in reserve. at that moment, it was       
impossible for me to gauge whether war bonds for amber would be a good            
investment. if eric lost, it would then be necessary for me to take on the        
invaders myself, after much of amber’s manpower had been wasted.                  
if i were to move in now with automatic weapons, there was little doubt           
in my mind that we would crush the wyvern-riders quickly. for that matter,        
one or more of my brothers had to be down in the valley. a gateway for            
some of my troops could be set up by means of the trumps. it would                
surprise whatever was down there for amber suddenly to come up with               
riflemen.                                                                         
i returned my attention to the conflict nearer at hand. no, it was not            
going well. i speculated as to the results of my intervening. eric would          
certainly be in no position to turn on me. besides any sympathy that might        
be mine for what he had put me through, i would be responsible for pulling        
his nuts out of the fire. while he would be grateful for the relief, he would     
not be too happy over the general sentiment this would arouse. no, indeed.        
i would be back in amber with a very deadly personal bodyguard and a lot          
of goodwill going for me. an intriguing thought. it would provide a far           
smoother route to my objective than the brutal frontal assault culminating in     
regicide that i had had in mind.                                                  
yes.                                                                              
i felt myself smiling. i was about to become a hero.                              
i must grant myself a small measure of grace, however. given the                  
choice only between amber with eric on the throne and amber fallen, there         
is no question but that my decision would have been the same, to attack.          
things were not going well enough to be certain, and while it would work          
to my advantage to save the day, my own advantage was not, ultimately,            
essential. i could not hate thee, eric, so much, loved i not amber more.          
i withdrew and hurried back down the slope, flashes of lightning hurling          
my shadow in every which direction.                                               
i halted at the periphery of my encampment. at its farther edge,                  
ganelon stood in shouting converse with a lone horseman, and i recognized         
the horse.                                                                        
i advanced, and at a sign from its rider the horse moved forward,                 
winding its way among the troops, heading in my direction. ganelon shook          
his head and followed.                                                            
the rider was dara. as soon as she was within earshot, i shouted at her.          
“what the hell are you doing here?” she dismounted, smiling, and stood            
before me.                                                                        
“i wanted to come to amber,” she said. “so i did.”                                
“how did you get here?”                                                           
“i followed grandpa,” she said. “it is easier to follow someone through           
shadow, i discovered, than to do it yourself.”                                    
“benedict is here?” she nodded.                                                   
“down below. he is directing the forces in the valley. julian is there,           
too.”                                                                             
ganelon came up and stood near.                                                   
“she said that she followed us up here,” he shouted. “she has been                
behind us for a couple days.”                                                     
“is that true?” i asked.                                                          
she nodded again, still smiling. “it was not hard to do.”                         
“but why did you do it?”                                                          
“to get into amber, of course? i want to walk the pattern! that is where          
you are going, isn’t it?”                                                         
“of course it is. but there happens to be a war in the way!”                      
“what are you going to do about it?”                                              
“win it, of course!”                                                              
“good. i’ll wait.”                                                                
i cursed for a few moments to give myself time to think, then, “where             
were you when benedict returned?” i asked.                                        
the smile went away.                                                              
“i do not know,” she said. “i was out riding after you left, and i stayed         
away the entire day. i wanted to be alone to think. when i returned in the        
evening, he was not there. i rode again the following day. i traveled quite a     
distance, and when it grew dark i decided to camp out. i do that often. the       
next afternoon, as i was returning home, i came to the top of a hill and saw      
him passing below, heading to the east. i decided to follow him. the way          
led through shadow, i understand that now—and you were right about it             
being easier to follow. i do not know how long it took. time got all mixed        
up. he came here, and i recognized it from the picture on one of the cards.       
he met with julian in a wood to the north, and they returned together to that     
battle below.” she gestured toward the valley. “i remained in the forest for      
several days, not knowing what to do. i was afraid of getting lost if i tried to  
backtrack. then i saw your force climbing the mountains. i saw you and i          
saw ganelon at their head. i knew that amber lay that way, and i followed.        
i waited until now to approach, because i wanted you to be too near to            
amber to send me back when i did.”                                                
“i don’t believe you are telling me the whole truth,” i said, “but i              
haven’t the time to care. we are going ahead now, and there will be               
fighting. the safest thing for you will be to remain here. i will assign you a    
couple of bodyguards.”                                                            
“i do not want them!”                                                             
“i don’t care what you want. you are going to have them. when the                 
fighting is over i will send for you.” i turned then and selected two men at      
random, ordering them to remain behind and guard her. they did not seem           
overjoyed at the prospect.                                                        
“what are those weapons your men bear?” dara asked.                               
“later,” i said. “i’m busy.” i relayed a sketchy briefing and ordered my          
squads.                                                                           
“you seem to have a very small number of men,” she said.                          
“they are sufficient,” i replied. “i will see you later.” i left her there        
with her guards.                                                                  
we moved back along the route i had taken. the thunder ceased as we               
advanced, and the silence became less a thing of relief than of suspense to       
me. the twilight resettled about us, and i perspired within the damp blanket      
of the air.                                                                       
i called a halt before we reached the first point from which i had                
observed the action. i returned to it then, accompanied by ganelon.               
the wyvern-riders were all over the place and their beasts fought along           
with them. they were pressing the defenders back against the cliff face. i        
sought for but could not locate eric or the glow of his jewel.                    
“which ones are the enemy?” ganelon asked me.                                     
“the beast-riders.”                                                               
they were all of them landing now that heaven’s artillery had let up. as          
soon as they struck the solid surface, they charged forward. i searched           
among the defenders, but gerard was no longer in sight.                           
“bring up the troops,” i said, raising my rifle. “tell them to get the            
beasts and the riders both.”                                                      
ganelon withdrew, and i took aim at a descending wyvern, fired, and               
watched its swoop turn into a sudden flurry of pinions. it struck against the     
slope and began to flop about. i fired again.                                     
the beast began to burn as it died. soon i had three bonfires going. i            
crawled up to my second previous position. secure, i took aim and fired           
once more.                                                                        
i got another, but by then some of them were turning in my direction. i           
fired the rest of my ammo and hastened to reload. several of them had             
begun moving toward me by then. they were quite fast.                             
i managed to stop them and was reloading again when the first rifle               
squad arrived. we put down a heavier fire, and began to advance as the            
others came up.                                                                   
it was all over within ten minutes. within the first five they had                
apparently realized that they hadn’t a chance, and they began to flee back        
toward the ledge, launching themselves into space, becoming airborne              
again. we shot them down as they ran, and burning flesh and smoldering            
bones lay everywhere about us.                                                    
the moist rock rose sheer to our left, its summit lost in the. clouds, so         
that it seemed as if it might tower endlessly above us. the winds still           
whipped the smoke and the mists, and the rocks were smeared and                   
splotched with blood. as we had advanced, firing, the forces of amber             
quickly realized that we represented assistance and began to push forward         
from their position at the base of the cliff. i saw that they were being led by   
my brother caine. for a moment our eyes locked together across the                
distance, then he plunged ahead into the fray.                                    
scattered groups of amberites united into a second force as the                   
attackers fell back. actually, they limited our field of fire when they           
attacked the far flank of the wizened beast-men and their wyverns, but i had      
no way of getting word of this to them. we drew closer, and our firing was        
accurate.                                                                         
a small knot of men remained at the base of the cliff. i had a feeling            
they were guarding eric, and that he had possibly been wounded, since the         
storm effects had ceased abruptly. i worked my own way off in that                
direction.                                                                        
the firing was already beginning to die down as i drew near the group,            
and i was hardly aware of what happened next until it was too late.               
something big came rushing up from behind and was by me in an                     
instant. i hit the ground and rolled, bringing my rifle to bear automatically.    
my finger did not tighten on the trigger, however. it was dara, who had just      
plunged past me on horseback. she turned and laughed as i screamed at her.        
“get back down there! damn you! you’ll be killed!”                                
“i’ll see you in amber!” she cried, and she shot on across the grisly             
rock and made it up the trail that lay beyond.                                    
i was furious. but there was nothing i could do about it just then.               
snarling, i got back to my feet and continued on.                                 
as i advanced upon the group, i heard my name spoken several times.               
heads turned in my direction. people moved aside to let me pass. i                
recognized many of them, but i paid them no heed.                                 
i think that i saw gerard at about the same time that he saw me. he had           
been kneeling in their midst, and he rose to his feet and waited. his face        
was expressionless.                                                               
as i drew nearer, i saw that it was as i had suspected. he had been               
kneeling to tend an injured man who rested upon the ground. it was eric.          
i nodded to gerard as i came up beside him, and i looked down at eric.            
my feelings were quite mixed. the blood from his several chest wounds             
was very bright and there was a lot of it. the jewel of judgment, which still     
hung on a chain about his neck, was covered with it. eerily, it continued its     
faint, glowing pulsation, heart-like beneath the gore. eric’s eyes were           
closed, his head resting upon a rolled-up cloak. his breathing was labored.       
i knelt, unable to take my eyes off that ashen face. i tried to push my           
hate aside just a little, since he was obviously dying, so that i might have a    
better chance to understand this man who was my brother for the moments           
that remained to him. i found that i could muster up something of sympathy        
by considering all that he was losing along with his life and wondering           
whether it would have been me lying there if i had come out on top five           
years earlier. i tried to think of something in his favor, and all i could come   
up with were the epitaph-like words, he died fighting for amber. that was         
something, though. the phrase kept running through my mind.                       
his eyes tightened, flickered, opened. his face remained without                  
expression as his eyes focused on mine. i wondered whether he even                
recognized me.                                                                    
but he said my name, and then, “i knew that it would be you.” he                  
paused for a couple of breaths and went on, “they saved you some trouble,         
didn’t they?” i did not reply. he already knew the answer.                        
“your turn will come one day,” he continued. “then we will be peers.”             
he chuckled and realized too late that he should not have. he went into an        
unpleasant spasm of moist coughing. when it passed, he glared at me.              
“i could feel your curse,” he said. “all around me. the whole time. you           
didn’t even have to die to make it stick.”                                        
then, as if reading my thoughts, he smiled faintly and said, “no i’m not          
going to give you my death curse. i’ve reserved that for the enemies of           
amber—out there.” he gestured with his eyes. he pronounced it then, in a          
whisper, and i shuddered to overhear it.                                          
he returned his gaze to my face and stared for a moment. then he                  
plucked at the chain about his neck.                                              
“the jewel…” he said. “you take it with you to the center of the                  
pattern. hold it up. very close—to an eye. stare into it—and consider it a        
place. try to project yourself—inside. you don’t go. but there is—an              
experience… afterward, you know how to use it…”                                   
“how—?” i began, but stopped. he had already told me how to attune                
to it. why ask him to waste his breath on how he had figured it out?              
but he caught it and managed, “dworkin’s notes… under fireplace…                  
my—”                                                                              
then he was taken with another coughing spell and the blood came out              
of his nose and his mouth. he sucked in a deep breath and heaved himself          
into a sitting position, eyes rolling wildly.                                     
“acquit yourself as well as i have—bastard!” he said, then fell into my           
arms and heaved out his final, bloody breath.                                     
i held him for several moments, then lowered him into his former                  
position. his eyes were still open, and i reached out and closed them.            
almost automatically, i put his hands together atop the now lifeless gem. i       
had no stomach to take it from him at that moment. i stood then, removed          
my cloak, and covered him with it.                                                
turning, i saw that all of them were staring at me. familiar faces, many          
of them. some strange ones mixed in. so many who had been there that              
night when i had come to dinner in chains…                                        
no. it was not the time to think of that. i pushed it from my mind. the           
shooting had stopped, and ganelon was calling the troops back and                 
ordering some sort of formation.                                                  
i walked forward.                                                                 
i passed among the amberites. i passed among the dead. i walked by                
my own troops and moved to the edge of the cliff.                                 
in the valley below me, the fighting continued, the cavalry flowing like          
turbulent waters, merging, eddying, receding, the infantry still swarming         
like insects.                                                                     
i drew forth the cards i had taken from benedict. i removed his own               
from the deck. it shimmered before me, and after a time there was contact.        
he was mounted on the same red and black horse on which he had                    
pursued me. he was in motion and there was fighting all about him. seeing         
that he confronted another horseman, i remained still. he spoke but a single      
word. “bide,” he said.                                                            
he dispatched his opponent with two quick movements of his blade.                 
then he wheeled his mount and began to withdraw from the fray. i saw that         
his horse’s reins had been lengthened and were looped and tied loosely            
about the remainder of his right arm. it took him over ten minutes to             
remove himself to a place of relative calm. when he had, he regarded me,          
and i could tell that he was also studying the prospect that lay at my back.      
“yes, i am on the heights,” i told him. “we have won. eric died in the            
battle.”                                                                          
he continued to stare, waiting for me to go on. his face betrayed no              
emotion.                                                                          
“we won because i brought riflemen,” i said. “i finally found an                  
explosive agent that functions here.” his eyes narrowed and he nodded. i          
felt that he realized immediately what the stuff was and where it had come        
from.                                                                             
“while there are many things i want to discuss with you,” i continued,            
“i want to take care of the enemy first. if you will hold the contact, i will     
send you several hundred riflemen.” he smiled.                                    
“hurry,” he said.                                                                 
i shouted for ganelon, and he answered me from only a few paces                   
away. i told him to line the troops up, single file. he nodded and went off,      
shouting orders.                                                                  
as we waited, i said, “benedict, dara is here. she was able to follow             
you through shadow when you rode in from avalon. i want-”                         
he bared his teeth and shouted: “who the hell is this dara you keep               
talking about? i never heard of her till you came along! please tell me! i        
would really like to know!”                                                       
i smiled faintly.                                                                 
“it’s no good,” i said, shaking my head. “i know all about her, though i          
have told no one else that you’ve a great granddaughter.”                         
his lips parted involuntarily and his eyes were suddenly wide.                    
“corwin,” he said, “you are either mad or deceived. i’ve no such                  
descendant that i know of. as for anyone following me here through                
shadow, i came in on julian’s trump.”                                             
of course. my only excuse for not tripping her up immediately was my              
preoccupation with the conflict benedict would have been notified of the          
battle by means of the trumps. why should he waste time traveling when            
an instant means of transport was at hand?                                        
“damn!” i said. “she is in amber by now! listen, benedict! i am going             
to get gerard or caine over here to handle the transfer of the troops to you.     
ganelon will come through, also. give them their orders through him.”             
i looked around, saw gerard talking with several of the nobles. i                 
shouted for him with a desperate urgency. his head turned quickly. then he        
began running in my direction.                                                    
“corwin! what is it?” benedict was shouting.                                      
“i don’t know! but something is very wrong!” i thrust the trump at                
gerard as he came up.                                                             
“see that the troops get through to benedict!” i said. “is random in the          
palace?”                                                                          
“yes.”                                                                            
“free or confined?”                                                               
“free—more or less. there will be some guards about. eric still doesn’t           
—didn’t trust him.” i turned.                                                     
“ganelon,” i called out. “do what gerard here tells you. he is going to           
send you to benedict—down there.” i gestured. “see that the men follow            
benedict’s orders. i have to get into amber now.”                                 
“all right,” he called back.                                                      
gerard headed in his direction, and i fanned the trumps once more. i              
located random’s and began to concentrate. at that moment, it finally             
began to rain. i made contact almost immediately.                                 
“hello, random,” i said, as soon as his image came to life. “remember             
me?”                                                                              
“where are you?” he asked.                                                        
“in the mountains,” i told him. “we just won this part of the battle, and i       
am sending benedict the help he needs to clean up in the valley. now,             
though, i need your help. bring me across.”                                       
“i don’t know, corwin. eric—”                                                     
“eric is dead.”                                                                   
“then who is in charge?”                                                          
“who do you think? bring me across!”                                              
he nodded quickly and extended his hand. i reached out and clasped it.            
i stepped forward. i stood beside him on a balcony overlooking one of the         
courtyards. the railing was of white marble, and not much was blooming            
down below. we were two stories up. i swayed and he seized my arm.                
“you’re hurt!” be said.                                                           
i shook my head, only just then realizing how tired i was. i had not slept        
very much the past few nights. that, and everything else…                         
“no,” i said, glancing down at the gory mess that was my shirt front.             
“just tired. the blood is eric’s.”                                                
he ran a hand through his straw-colored hair and pursed his lips.                 
“so you did finally nail him…” he said softly. i shook my head again.             
“no. he was already dying when i got to him. come with me now!                    
hurry! it is important!”                                                          
“where to? what is the matter?”                                                   
“to the pattern,” i said. “why? i am not certain, but i know that it is           
important. come on!”                                                              
we entered the palace, moving toward the nearest stairwell. there were            
two guards at its head, but they came to attention as we approached and did       
not attempt to interfere with our passage.                                        
“i’m glad it’s true about your eyes,” random said as we headed down.              
“do you see all right?”                                                           
“yes. i hear that you are still married.”                                         
“yes. i am.”                                                                      
when we reached the ground floor, we hurried to the right. there had              
been another pair of guards at the foot of the stair, but they did not move to    
stop us.                                                                          
“yes,” he repeated, as we headed toward the center of the palace. “you            
are surprised, aren’t you?”                                                       
“yes. i thought you were going to get the year over with and be done              
with it.”                                                                         
“so did i,” he said. “but i fell in love with her. i really did.”                 
“stranger things have happened.”                                                  
we crossed the marble dining hall and entered the long, narrow corridor           
that led far back through shadows and dust. i suppressed a shudder as i           
thought of my condition the last time i had come this way.                        
“she really cares for me,” he said. “like nobody else ever has before.”           
“i’m glad for you,” i said.                                                       
we reached the door that opened onto the platform hiding the long,                
spiral stairway down. it was open. we passed through and began the                
descent.                                                                          
“i’m not,” he said, as we hurried around and around. “i didn’t want to            
fall in love. not then. we’ve been prisoners the whole time, you know. how        
can she be proud of that?”                                                        
“that is over now,” i said. “you became a prisoner because you                    
followed me and tried to kill eric, didn’t you?”                                  
“yes. then she joined me here.”                                                   
“i will not forget,” i said.                                                      
we rushed on. it was a great distance down, and there were only                   
lanterns every forty feet or so. it was a huge, natural cavern. i wondered        
whether anyone knew how many tunnels and corridors it contained. i                
suddenly felt myself overwhelmed with pity for any poor wretches rotting          
in its dungeons, for whatever reasons. i resolved to release them all or find     
something better to do with them.                                                 
long minutes passed. i could see the flickering of the torches and the            
lanterns below.                                                                   
“there is a girl,” i said, “and her name is dara. she told me she was             
benedict’s great-granddaughter and gave me reason to believe it. i told her       
somewhat concerning shadow, reality, and the pattern. she does possess            
some power over shadow, and she was anxious to walk the pattern. when             
last i saw her, she was headed this way. now benedict swears she is not his.      
suddenly i am fearful. i want to keep her from the pattern. i want to             
question her.”                                                                    
“strange,” he said. “very. i agree with you. do you think she might be            
there now?”                                                                       
“if she is not, then i feel she will be along soon.”                              
we finally reached the floor, and i began to race through the shadows             
toward the proper tunnel.                                                         
“wait!” random cried.                                                             
i halted and turned. it took me a moment to locate him, as he was back            
behind the stairs. i returned.                                                    
my question did not reach my lips. i saw that he knelt beside a large,            
bearded man.                                                                      
“dead,” he said. “a very thin blade. good thrust. just recently.”                 
“come on!”                                                                        
we both ran to the tunnel and turned up it. its seventh side passage was          
the one we wanted. i drew grayswandir as we neared it, for that great, dark,      
metal-bound door was standing ajar.                                               
i sprang through. random was right behind me. the floor of that                   
enormous room is black and looks to be smooth as glass, although it is not        
slippery. the pattern burns upon it, within it, an intricate, shimmering maze     
of curved lines, perhaps a hundred and fifty yards long. we halted at its         
edge, staring.                                                                    
something was out there, walking it. i felt that old, tingling chill the          
thing always gives me as i watched. was it dara? it was difficult for me to       
make out the figure within the fountains of sparks that spewed constantly         
about it. whoever it was had to be of the blood royal, for it was common          
knowledge that anyone else would be destroyed by the pattern, and this            
individual had already made it past the grand curve and was negotiating           
the complicated series of arcs that led toward the final veil.                    
the firefly form seemed to change shape as it moved. for a time, my               
senses kept rejecting the tiny subliminal glimpses that i knew must be            
coming through to me. i heard random gasp beside me, and it seemed to             
breach my subconscious dam. a horde of impressions flooded my mind.               
it seemed to tower hugely in that always unsubstantial-seeming                    
chamber. then shrink, die down, almost to nothing. it seemed a slim               
woman for a moment—possibly dara, her hair lightened by the glow,                 
streaming, crackling with static electricity. then it was not hair, but great,    
curved horns from some wide, uncertain brow, whose crook-legged owner             
struggled to shuffle hoofs along the blazing way. then something else… an         
enormous cat… a faceless woman… a bright-winged thing of                          
indescribable beauty… a tower of ashes…                                           
“dara!” i cried out. “is that you?”                                               
my voice echoed back, and that was all. whoever / whatever it was                 
struggled now with the final veil. my muscles strained forward in                 
unwilling sympathy with the effort.                                               
finally, it burst through.                                                        
yes, it was dara! tall and magnificent now. both beautiful and                    
somehow horrible at the same time. the sight of her tore at the fabric of my      
mind. her arms were upraised in exultation and an inhuman laughter                
flowed from her lips. i wanted to look away, yet i could not move. had i          
truly held, caressed, made love to—that? i was mightily repelled and              
simultaneously attracted as i had never been before. i could not understand       
this overwhelming ambivalence. then she looked at me.                             
the laughter ceased. her altered voice rang out. “lord corwin, are you            
liege of amber now?”                                                              
from somewhere, i managed a reply. “for all practical purposes,” i                
said.                                                                             
“good! then behold your nemesis!”                                                 
“who are you? what are you?”                                                      
“you will never know,” she said. “it is just exactly too late now.”               
“i do not understand. what do you mean?”                                          
“amber,” she said, “will be destroyed.” and she vanished.                         
“what the hell,” said random then, “was that?” i shook my head.                   
“i do not know. i really do not know. and i feel… that it is the most             
important thing in the world that we find out.”                                   
he gripped my arm.                                                                
“corwin,” he said. “she—it—meant it. and it may be possible, you                  
know.”                                                                            
i nodded. “i know.”                                                               
“what are we going to do now?”                                                    
i resheathed grayswandir and turned back toward the door.                         
“pick up the pieces,” i said. “i have what i thought i always wanted              
within my grasp now, and i must secure it. and i cannot wait for what is to       
come. i must seek it out and stop it before it ever reaches amber.”               
“do you know where to seek it?” he asked.                                         
we turned up the tunnel.                                                          
“i believe it lies at the other end of the black road,” i said.                   
we moved on through the cavern to the stairs where the dead man lay               
and went round and round above him in the dark.                                   
